
                              18 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2010 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                              All Rights Reserved
                            The Independent (London)

                            October 15, 2010 Friday
                                 First Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 4211 words

HEADLINE: Quango hit-list signals the start of mass cull of public sector jobs;

Whitehall website crashes as worried civil servants scramble to learn their fate

BYLINE: Oliver Wright Whitehall Editor

BODY:

   TENS OF THOUSANDS of jobs will be lost - the first of 600,000 in the public
sector - as hundreds of quangos are scrapped, merged or fundamentally reformed
in the largest shake-up of power in Whitehall for a generation.

   A total of 192 quangos will be abolished and 118 bodies merged. Overall the
number of quangos will be cut from 901 to 648.

   Within minutes of the cuts being announced by the Cabinet Office minister
Francis Maude, its website had crashed under the scale of hits from worried
civil servants.

   But last night ministers were unable to put a figure on how much money will
be saved - if any, in the short term - or specify the exact number of jobs that
will be lost. The Government currently spends around £38bn a year on
non-departmental bodies, which employ a total of 325,000 staff.

   Privately, ministers say that some of the changes may initially cost more
than they save in redundancies, relocation costs and other liabilities. Other
quangos may prove harder to close or reform than expected, and there could yet
be changes to the programme.

   "People are looking at this as the end of the process but in fact it is
really just the beginning," said one official. "There is a very long way to go
yet."

   Among the main changes announced by Mr Maude are:

   * Axing the Audit Commission, the Youth Justice Board and all the regional
development agencies. Forty quangos will be abolished entirely and all their
staff made redundant. Around 150 more will have some or all of their functions
subsumed into central government.

   * Amalgamating the Office of Fair Trading and the Competition Commission into
one super competition and market authority. Ofcom will lose its powers to review
public service broadcasting and media ownership rules but will take over
Postcomm which currently regulates postal services. The Government says 171
quangos will be "substantially" reformed.

   * Scaling back the power of some quangos such as Natural England and the
Environment Agency - preventing them from taking part in any policy-making or
lobbying activities.

   * Reconstituting several bodies into independent charities, including British
Waterways, which looks after Britain's 2,200 miles of rivers and canals, and the
Design Council.

   There were very few specific details available for the worried civil servants
or the broader public to see. Beyond the raw figures of which quangos would stay
and go, ministers could not say how many jobs were likely to be affected either
at individual quangos or in total.

   Privately, officials admitted that some quangos might not be abolished for
years as the cost of closing them immediately would far outweigh the cost of
keeping them.

   Unions condemned the plans as ill-thought out. "The fact that Francis Maude
is unable to say how much will be saved and how many jobs will be affected by
this cull shows the threadbare nature of the thinking behind these abolition
plans," said Tony Woodley, joint leader of the Unite union.

   Mr Maude insisted that the changes were not simply about saving money but
about bringing in a "new era of accountability" in government. "For too long
this country has tolerated ministers who duck the difficult decisions they were
elected to make," he said.

   "Today's announcement means that many important and essential functions will
be brought back into departments, meaning the line of accountability will run
right up to the very top, where it always should have been."

   Labour said that it backed the idea of cutting the number of quangos but
accused the Government of changing its argument over why they should be axed
when it became clear that costs associated with closing them would not lead to
any savings. "I am afraid the minister has become the most expensive butcher in
the country," said the shadow Cabinet Office minister, Liam Byrne.

   Sir Ian Magee, senior fellow of the Institute for Government, who co-authored
the report on reforming quangos, called Read Before Burning, said that this was
only the beginning of a very complex task of reform. "The review suggests that
there are very few functions which government can dispense with entirely," he
said. "But simply merging functions back in to departments will not necessarily
lead to greater transparency."

   Mr Maude said that decisions had yet to be taken about the future of 40
quangos which awaited other reviews. These include the Student Loans Company,
which will learn its fate after the White Paper on higher education is published
later this year.

   One quango due to be axed which is unlikely to win much public sympathy is
the Government Hospitality Advisory Committee on the Purchase of Wines. It was
founded in 1922 by another Liberal-Conservative coalition government.

   BODIES TO BE ABOLISHED

   DEPARTMENT FOR BUSINESS, INNOVATION AND SKILLS

   Aircraft and Shipbuilding Industries Arbitration Tribunal Organises
compensation for the nationalisation of aerospace and shipbuilding industries.
Abolish body and functions

   British Nuclear Fuels Limited Provides products and services to the nuclear
industry and governments. To be abolished.

   British Shipbuilders Body that used to own the and managed British
shipbuilding. To be abolished.

   Competition Service Provides funds and services for the Competition Appeal
Tribunal. By April 2011, consider the case for abolition.

   Consumer Focus Investigates consumer issues and champions consumer causes.
Awaiting review and probable transfer to Citizens Advice

   Copyright Tribunal Settles disputes in collective

   copyright licensing. Transfered to Ministry of Justice subject to final
agreement.

   Design Council Supports and promotes design. To become an independent
charity, subject to Privy Council agreement

   Hearing Aid Council Trained and registered companies making hearing aids.
Abolished last July.

   NESTA (National Endowment for Science, Technology and the Arts) Invests in
start-ups, supports innovation and growth. To become an independent charity.
Endowment to be held in a separate trust.

   Regional Development Agencies (x 8) Create regional economic growth. To be
abolished with responsibilities transferred to central or local government and
bodies.

   SITPRO Ltd UK trade body eases international trade,

   focusing on procedures and documentation. Abolished at the end of September.

   Strategic Advisory Board for Intellectual Property Advises on intellectual
property policy and law and practice. To be abolished. Some functions
transferred to UK Intellectual Property Office.

   Union Modernisation Fund Supervisory Board Grant scheme providing financial
assistance to independent trade unions and federations. Abolished.

   Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipment Advisory Body (WAB) Oversees
regulations for disposal of household electrical waste. Abolished at end of
September.

   CABINET OFFICE

   Capacitybuilders Improves provision of advice and support for charities,
voluntary groups and social enterprises in England. Alternative provision under
review.

   Civil Service Appeal Board Non-departmental body sponsored by the Cabinet
Office hear appeals by civil servants against dismissal and premature
retirement. To be wound down and transferred to the Civil Service.

   Commission for the Compact Works with the Government and voluntary and
community

   sector to create guidelines for how both parties should work together.
Functions to be carried out by Compact Voice and the Cabinet Office.

   Government Strategic Marketing Advisory Board Replaced the Advertising
Advisory Committee, a consumer panel consulted on advertising. Any remaining
function will be passed to the Efficiency and Reform Group

   Main Honours Advisory Committee Independent body advises on the distribution
of honours. To be administered from within the Cabinet Office

   Office for Civil Society Advisory Body Senior figures from charity sector
advise the Government on the its needs. To be abolished next March.

   Security Commission Investigates breaches of

   security in the public sector. Government will consider breaches as and when
they occur.

   COMMUNITIES AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT

   Advisory Panel for the Local Innovation Awards Scheme Abolish body and
function.

   Advisory Panel on Standards for the Planning Inspectorate Considers all
complaints made against the Planning Inspectorate. To be replaced by
Inspectorate's internal challenge process.

   Audit Commission for Local Authorities and the National Health Service in
England Independent watchdog driving economy, efficiency and effectiveness in
local public services. To be abolished.

   Community Development Foundation Network of community foundations that manage
funds donated by individuals and organisations. Abolished

   Firebuy Provides procurement services for English Fire and Rescue Service
(FRS). To be abolished.

   Infrastructure Planning Commission Eases planning for nationally significant
projects in energy, transport and waste sectors. To be replaced with Major
Infrastructure Planning Unit in the Planning Inspectorate.

   London Thames Gateway Development Corporation A regeneration agency for the
Lower Lea Valley and London Riverside. Abolish and devolve functions.

   National Housing and Planning Advice Unit Provides research and advice about
provision of affordable housing. Abolished.

   National Tenant Voice Promotes the views of tenants in social housing. To be
abolished

   Olympic Park Legacy Company Ltd Concerned with the long-term maintenance of
Olympic facilities after the 2012 Game. Transferred to Mayor of London

   Rent Assessment Panels / Residential Property Tribunal Service Umbrella body
holding tribunals to determine appropriate rents for properties. Transferred to
the Ministry of Justice's tribunal service

   Standards Board for England Promotes high standards among local government
professionals in England. To be abolished

   The Office for Tenants and Social Landlords (also known as Tenant Services
Authority) Regulatory body for social housing.providers. To be abolished body.
Regulatory functions passed to Homes and Communities Agency.

   Thurrock Development Corporation Abolish body and devolve functions to local
government

   Valuation Tribunal for England Legal wing of Valuation Tribunal, dealing with
appeals regarding council tax. Transferred to the Ministry of Justice's tribunal
service

   Valuation Tribunal Service Deals with council tax appeals, as well as appeals
related to drainage rates Transferred to the Ministry of Justice's tribunal
service

   West Northamptonshire Development Corporation Promotes economic growth in
Northampton, Daventry and Towcester Abolish body and devolve functions to local
government

   DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT

   Advisory Committee on Historic Wreck Sites Advises Government on matters
relating to Protection of Wrecks Act 1973. Abolished, transfer functions in
relation to England to English Heritage Advisory Committee on National Historic
Ships Advisory body on funding related to preservation of historic ships.
Abolished, functions transferred Advisory Committee on the Government Art
Collection Meets three times per year. Reconstituted as a committee of experts
Advisory Council on Libraries Abolish body and functions, as previously
announced Football Licensing Authority Concerned with the safety and security of
spectators at football grounds. Abolished, responsibilities transferred
Horserace Totalisator Board Organises pools betting on horseracing. To be
abolished and sold off Legal Deposit Advisory Panel Advises the Secretary of
State on legal deposit issues, including which non-print publications should be
considered for inclusion in legal depost. Abolished, as previously announced
Museums, Libraries and Archives Council Abolish body and transfer functions, as
previously announced Public Lending Right Advises authors on registering for the
legal right to payment from Government each time their books are borrowed from
public libraries Abolished The Theatres Trust Promotes the value of theatre
buildings. To be continued as a charity. UK Film Council Funds and promotes
British film. Abolish body and transfer functions, as announced

   DEPT OF ENERGY AND CLIMATE CHANGE

   Advisory Committee on Carbon Abatement Technologies Provides expert,
independent advice to the Government on technologies for reducing greenhouse gas
emissions Abolished last July Renewables Advisory Board Advises Government on
renewable energy issues Abolish body and function UK Chemical Weapons Convention
National Authority Advisory Committee Responsible for implementing the Chemical
Weapons Convention. Abolish body and function

   DEPARTMENT FOR ENVIRONMENT, FOOD AND RURAL AFFAIRS

   Advisory Committee on Hazardous Substances An expert scientific committee
whose remit is to provide government with advice on hazardous chemicals.
Reconstituted as a committee of experts. Advisory Committee on Organic Standards
Oversees development and implementation of organic standards and assists Defra
with its supervision of the licencing system. To be abolished. Advisory
Committee on Packaging Advises on compliance with the EU directives on packaging
and packaging waste. Reconstituted as a committee of experts. Advisory Committee
on Pesticides Advises on all matters relating to the control of pesticides.
Reconstituted as a committee of experts. Agricultural Dwelling House Advisory
Committees (x16) Adjudicates on disputes between farmers and agricultural
workers living in tied cottages. Abolished. Agricultural Wages Board for England
and Wales Set up to fix minimum wages for workers employed in agriculture in
England and Wales. Abolished - agricultural workers to be brought under national
minimum wages legislation. Agricultural Wages Committees (x15) Deals with
complaints and disputes between farmers and agricultural workers over pay. To be
abolished. Air Quality Expert Group Provides independent scientific advice on
air quality. Reconstituted as a committee of experts. Animal Health and Welfare
Strategy England Implementation Group Aims to improve the health and welfare of
kept animals in England. To be abolished. British Waterways To be abolished.
Commission for Rural Communities Promotes an awareness of the social and
economic needs of people who live and work in rural areas. To be abolished.
Committee on Agricultural Valuation To advise on agricultural valuation,
calculating the measure of compensation for an incoming tenant, claimable by an
outgoing tenant. To be abolished. Commons Commissioners Settles disputed entries
in the registers of common land and determine the ownership of unclaimed common
land and greens. To be abolished. Darwin Advisory Committee Helps poor countries
meet biodiversity obligations contained within Darwin Initiative. Reconstituted
as a committee of experts. Expert Panel on Air Quality Standards To be
abolished. Farm Animal Welfare Council Reviews the welfare of animals on land,
at market, in transit and at the place of slaughter. Reconstituted as a
committee of experts Food from Britain Promotes exports. To be abolished. Inland
Waterways Advisory Council Provides advice about the use and development of
inland waterways in England, Wales and Scotland. To be abolished. National
Standing Committee on Farm Animal Genetic Resources Provides advice on issues
relating to the conservation and use of the UK's farm animal genetic resources.
Reconstituted as a committee of experts. Pesticide Residues Committee Tests food
and drink for pesticides. Reconstituted as a committee of experts. Royal
Commission on Environmental Pollution Advises on environmental issues. To be
abolished. Spongiform Encephalopathy Advisory Committee Advises the government
on the control of BSE and variant CJD. Transferred to the Department of Health.
Veterinary Residues Committee Controls presence of residues of Veterinary
Medicines in domestic produce. Reconstituted as a committee of experts. Zoos
Forum Advises the government on zoo licensing matters. Reconstituted as a
committee of experts.

   DEPARTMENT FOR EDUCATION

   British Educational Communications and Technology Agency Ensures effective
and innovative use of technology in learning in England. To be abolished.
General Teaching Council for England Regulates standards of teaching in England.
To be abolished. Independent Advisory Group on Teenage Pregnancy To be abolished
once the existing remit for the group comes to an end in December.
Qualifications and Curriculum Development Agency Concerned with formulation of
curriculaand exams in primary and secondary schools. To be abolished. School
Food Trust Regulates quality of school food to promote health. To be continued
as a charity. Teachers TV Board of Governors Supports editorial independence of
Teachers TV. To be abolished.

   DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH

   Advisory Board on the Registration of Homeopathic Products To be
reconstituted as a committee of experts. Advisory Committee on Antimicrobial
Resistance and Healthcare Associated Infections To be reconstituted as a
committee of experts. Advisory Committee on Borderline Substances Advises GPs on
prescribing substances such as food, sun cream and toiletries. Abolish and
reconstitute as DH or Public Health Service committee of experts.Advisory
Committee on Dangerous Pathogens To be reconstituted as a committee of experts.
Advisory Committee on the Safety of Blood, Tissues and Organs To be
reconstituted as a committee of experts. Advisory Group on Hepatitis To be
reconstituted as a committee of experts. Alcohol Education and Research Council
To be turned into a charity.. Appointments Commission Provides recruitment
services for Government departments. Responsibilities transferred to ministers.
Committee on Carcogenicity of Chemicals in Food, Consumer Products and the
Environment To be reconstituted as a committee of experts. Committee on Medical
Effects of Air Pollutants To be reconstituted as a committee of experts.
Committee on Medical Aspects of Radiation in the Environment To be reconstituted
as a committee of experts. Committee on Mutagenicity of Chemicals in Food,
Consumer Products and the Environment To be reconstituted as a committee of
experts. Committee on the Safety of Devices Concerned with the safety to
patients of medical equipment. To be reconstituted as a committee of experts.
Council for Healthcare Regulatory Excellence To be abolished. Expert Advisory
Group on AIDS To be reconstituted as a committee of experts. Gene Therapy
Advisory Committee Oversees proposals of gene therapy treatment with emphasis on
ethics. To be abolished. General Social Care Council Regulatory body for the
profession and training of social care workers. To be abolished. Genetics and
Insurance Committee Concerned with specific genetic tests, and their relevance
to insurance. To be abolished. Health Protection Agency Publicises information
to health professionals, the public and government concerning diseases and
environmental hazard. To be transferred to the new Public Health Service. Herbal
Medicines Advisory Committee To be reconstituted as a committee of experts.
Human Fertilisation and Embryology Authority Regulatory body for fertility
clinics, IVF, donor sperm, advises medical professional. To be transferred to
other regulators. Human Genetics Commission Concerned with social and ethical
issues in human genetics. Advises government on social impact of developments.
To be reconstitute as a committee of experts. Human Tissue Authority Regulatory
authority on organisations concerned with storage and use of human tissues. To
be transferred to other regulators. Independent Advisory Group on Sexual Health
and HIV To be abolished. Independent Review Panel for the Classification of
Borderline Products Determines whether products are, or are not, medical
products in-line with legislation. To be reconstituted as a committee of
experts. Independent Review panel on the Advertising of Medicines To be
reconstituted as a committee of experts. Joint Committee on Vaccination and
Immunisations To be reconstituted as a committee of experts. National
Information Governance Board for Health and Social Care To be abolished.
National Joint Registry Steering Committee Advises the Dept of Health and the
Welsh Government on poorly performing hip and knee joint prostheses and monitors
NHS and independent healthcare providers in carrying out hip and knee
replacement surgery. To be reconstituted as a committee of experts. Scientific
Advisory Committee on Nutrition To be reconstituted as a committee of experts.

   BRITISH FOREIGN AND COMMONWEALTH OFFICE

   Caribbean Board Aims to improve relations between the UK and the Caribbean.To
be abolished. Government Hospitality Advisory Committee on the purchase of Wines
To be abolished.

   MINISTRY OF JUSTICE

   Administrative Justice and Tribunal Council Aims to make the justice system
accessible, fair and efficient. To be abolished. Chief Coroner of England and
Wales/Chief Coroner's Office To be abolished. Courts Boards (x 19) Provide
recommendations for improvements to the administrative services within Her
Majesty's Courts Service. To be abolished. Crown Court Rule Committee Regulates
the practice and procedure of the Crown Court. To be abolished. HM Inspectorate
of Court Administration Inspects the systems that support the Crown, county and
magistrates' courts in England and Wales. To be abolished. Legal Services
Commission Works with solicitors and not-for-profit organisations to provide
citizens with legal advice. To be abolished. Legal Services Ombudsman Oversees
the handling of complaints about lawyers in Englad and Wales To be abolished.
Magistrates' Courts Rule Committee Responsible for modernising court procedure
To be abolished. Public Guardian Board Supervises the Public Guardian which
oversees interests of people who lack capacity. Abolish. Victim's Advisory Panel
Aims to give victims of crime a say in the reform of the criminal justice
system. To be abolished. Youth Justice Board for England and Wales Aims to
prevent offending and reoffending by children and young people. To be abolished.

   HOME OFFICE

   National Policing Improvement Agency Responsible for building capability
across the police service and providing professional expertise to police forces
and authorities. Under review. Security Industry Authority Responsible for
regulating private security industry.Phased transition to new regulatory regime.

   THE GOVERNMENT'S EQUALITIES OFFICE

   Women's National Commission Represents women and women's organisations. To be
abolished.

   THE MINISTRY OF DEFENCE

   Animal Welfare Advisory Committee Advises the MoD on the care of animals used
in defence experiments. To be abolished.

   DEPARTMENT FOR TRANSPORT

   BRB (Residuary) Ltd Looks after the residual responsibilities and liabilities
of the former British Railway Board. To be abolished. Commission for Integrated
Transport To be abolished. Cycling England Promotes the growth of cycling and
cycle safety in England. To be abolished.

   Disabled Persons' Transport Advisory Committee To be abolished. Railway
Heritage Committee To be abolished. Renewable Fuels Agency Allocates Renewable
Transport Fuel Certificates (RTFCs) to suppliers of biofuels in the UK.
Transferred to the Secretary of State for Transport.

   DEPARTMENT OF WORK AND PENSIONS

   Child Maintenance and Enforcement Commission Will become an executive agency
of DWP. Disability Employment Advisory Committee Responsibilities transferred.
Disability Living Allowance / Attendance Allowance Advisory Board Transferred to
the DWP.

   ALSO ON THE HIT-LIST

   EARMARKED FOR MERGER WITH OTHER NON-DEPARTMENTAL PUBLIC BODIES

   * Central Arbitration Committee Certification Office

   * Competition Commission

   * Ofcom

   * Office of Fair Trading

   * Postcomm

   * Gambling Commission

   * National Lottery Commission

   * Sport England

   * UK Sport

   * 101 Advisory Committees on Justices of the Peace

   * Advisory Council on Historical Manuscripts

   * Advisory Council on Public Records

   * Crown Prosecution Service

   * Revenue and Customs Prosecutions Office

   * Serious Organised Crime Agency

   * Pensions Ombudsman

   * Pensions Protection Fund Ombudsman

   FUTURE STILL UNDER CONSIDERATION

   * Construction Industry Training Board

   * Engineering Construction Industry Training Board

   * Film Industry Training Board

   * Insolvency Practitioners Tribunal

   * Local Better Regulation Office

   * Office for Fair Access

   * Student Loans Company

   * UK Atomic Energy Authority

   * UK Commission for Employment and Skills

   * Central Office of Information

   * National School of Government

   * The Leasehold Advisory Service

   * Commission for Architecture and the Built Environment

   * Agriculture and Horticulture Development Board

   * Agricultural Land Tribunal

   * Consumer Council for Water

   * Plant Varieties and Seeds Tribunal

   * Sea Fish Licence Tribunal

   * Children and Family Court Advisory and Support Service

   * Children's Workforce Development Council

   * National College for Leadership of Schools and Children's Services

   * Partnerships for Schools

   * The Office of the Children's Commissioner

   * Training and Development Agency for Schools

   * Young People's Learning Agency Diplomatic Service Appeals Board

   * Foreign Compensation Commission

   * Great Britain China Centre

   * UK India Round Table

   * Advisory Panel on Public Sector Information

   * Judicial Appointments Commission

   * Judicial Appointments and Conduct Ombudsman

   * Independent Safeguarding Authority

   * Office of the Immigration Services Commissioner

   * Police Advisory Board, Police n Negotiating Board and Police n Arbitration
Tribunal

   * National Employer Advisory Board

LOAD-DATE: October 14, 2010


                              19 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2010 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                              All Rights Reserved
                            The Independent (London)

                            October 15, 2010 Friday
                                 First Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 61 words

HEADLINE: We'll miss some more than others;
SCIENCE

BYLINE: Steve Connor Science Editor

BODY:

   MANY OF the "quangos" are actually committees of unpaid scientists who act as
independent specialist advisers on subjects ranging from the safety of
pesticides to the use of gene therapy in medicine.

   However, some of these groups, like the Spongiform Encephalopathy Advisory
Committee set up 20 years ago to deal with "mad cow" disease, may have outlived
their usefulness.

LOAD-DATE: October 14, 2010


                              28 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2010 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                              All Rights Reserved
                            The Independent (London)

                              July 2, 2010 Friday
                                 First Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 488 words

HEADLINE: Will this step towards a longer life create yet another divide in our
society?;
The ethics

BYLINE: AC Grayling

BODY:

   Discovering the genes that may contribute towards longevity is a step towards
making us all live longer. Future human beings are going to have a very
different perspective on the definition of a human life - it will take a
different shape.

   There is huge promise in this type of genetic research. If it helps us to
cure or detect diseases, to tackle life-threatening problems, then it would be
very useful and powerful knowledge to have.

   Of course there are challenging aspects to this research. We have yet to
answer serious questions such as: Where do we stop? What kind of research do we
not need? What sort of things do we really not want to know?

   But we should never underestimate the human capacity to cope with bad news.
If I found out that I would only live to, say, 60 or 90 and everyone else was
going to live to 150, would I be able to cope with it? Of course I would,
eventually.

   It would be horrible to begin with. I'd moan and groan. But one would adjust
and we cope with it. In itself, it is not a reason to get frightened, stop this
research too soon and hide your head in the sand.

   We all live under the life sentence of death but we have evolved not to think
about it. There's a great deal to be said for all the natural uncertainties that
human beings have lived with. We shape our lives around the belief that we are
all going to be healthy and live a long time. That's only true for actually
quite a small proportion of us. But that's the premise we work with.

   When someone employs us, when someone insures us, when we make plans for the
future, when we have children, we are assuming the best scenario.

   If we adjusted our lives according to the possibility that we could be
knocked down by a bus tomorrow it would be anarchy: we would never get anything
done. We'd never team up with anyone. We'd never plan a family.

   One issue in all this that poses a serious dilemma is: what if third parties
like employers or insurance companies began to discriminate against people on
the basis of their genetic makeup?

   There is a danger, particularly in the next few years as this knowledge
trickles out in partial dribs and drabs, that third parties begin to use it
against us.

   We have to ask ourselves what we are going to do about it and how are we
going to manage it because we don't want people being discriminated against.

   You also have to ask yourself who will benefit from this kind of knowledge.
Throughout human history there has always been the haves and the have-nots. That
division still exists now, most familiarly in the form of the rich and poor
divide.

   Will knowledge of our genetic make-up one day create another divide? Those
who have access to gene therapy, longer life or wider knowledge of their genetic
makeup are going to be in a far stronger position compared to those who don't
have that knowledge.

   It could become another wedge to drive people apart.

   AC Grayling is professor of philosophy at Birkbeck College

LOAD-DATE: July 1, 2010


                              31 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2010 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                              All Rights Reserved
                            The Independent (London)

                              June 11, 2010 Friday
                                 First Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 1240 words

HEADLINE: CRISIS ON THE WARDS AT A BRITISH INSTITUTION;
With criticism by inspectors and claims of bullying, is Great Ormond Street
Hospital's halo starting to slip? Jeremy Laurance reports

BYLINE: Jeremy Laurance

BODY:

   It is Britain's most famous hospital - the largest centre for research into
childhood illness outside the US, and the largest children's cancer centre in
Europe. Mention Great Ormond Street and the coins cascade into the collecting
tins - to the chagrin of rival institutions who say it swallows an unfair
proportion of medical donors' cash.

   But there are fears that things may be going wrong at our most cherished
medical institution. There are rumblings of discontent among its consultants, 42
of whom have signed letters of complaint about the management. Allegations of
bullying and intimidation are swirling around the corridors and 20 disaffected
consultants met last week at the British Medical Association (BMA). Next
Tuesday, the chair of the Medical Staff Committee, Graham Davies, has called a
meeting of all consultants in the trust to head off the growing storm.

   The meeting comes at a delicate time for the hospital. Despite its superstar
reputation, it has still not qualified as for the NHS foundation status that
would give it the freedom to manage its own affairs. It has lurched from crisis
to financial crisis and over the past two years its "quality" rating has been
downgraded by the independent inspectorate, the Care Quality Commission, from
"excellent" to "good" to "fair".

   After five difficult years, the trust expects to make a surplus this year, it
is concluding its public consultation on foundation trust status and expects to
put in an application in the summer. If all goes well, it should become a
Foundation Trust next April.

   But there are several hurdles to be cleared. The trust was severely
criticised in 2009 over Baby Peter, who died in 2007 under the care of Haringey
social services after suffering prolonged abuse. The Care Quality Commission
said doctors and staff employed by Great Ormond Street missed dozens of
opportunities to detect the abuse and blamed poor management, inadequate
staffing and training and failures in communication.

   Out of that scandal has arisen another headache. Kim Holt, a Great Ormond
Street consultant, was placed on special leave after complaining about
inadequate staffing in advance of the Baby Peter tragedy. She has been on leave
on full pay since November 2007.

   An inquiry by NHS London last year found Dr Holt had acted properly and
should be reinstated. It recommended mediation but six months later, Dr Holt has
not been reinstated.

   She has been backed by Lynne Featherstone, MP for Hornsey and Wood Green and
newly appointed Minister for Women, and a petition with 2,500 signatures was
handed to the Health Secretary. Ms Featherstone blogged this week: "Since I got
involved with the excellent paediatrician Kim Holt ... I have wondered whether
the management would ever be brought to account."

   Referring to reports that over 40 consultants had signed a letter of no
confidence in Jane Collins, the chief executive of the trust, she said: "This
would seem to back up everything Kim Holt has experienced."

   Dr Holt, currently on secondment working in a different area of the trust,
told The Independent: "The reason we are up in arms is because management are
doing the same to other consultants. You cannot believe the bullying and
intimidation. People do not dare to challenge management.

   "I am a whistleblower. I was told in November 2007 that I was not being
allowed back to my job on grounds of my health and relations with management.
The NHS London report said it was not good enough and I should have been
supported. For two years I was stuck at home. They are talking about me going
back to my old job but are making me jump through hoops."

   Four consultants are understood to have begun grievance procedures against
the trust. Their complaints were discussed at the meeting at the BMA and
subsequently a letter was circulated expressing concerns about named members of
management, which collected 42 signatures.

   A group of consultants took the letters to a meeting with the chairman of the
trust, Baroness Tessa Blackstone, last week. But according to the trust, the
group did not leave the letters with the chairman or respond to requests to send
her copies.

   When reports emerged last weekend that the signatories to the letters had
demanded the resignation of the chief executive, Jane Collins, supporters of Dr
Collins, who has held the post for nine years, sprang into action. By 1pm on
Wednesday, 122 consultants - half of the 242 directly employed by the trust -
had signed letters of support for Dr Collins.

   Baroness Blackstone issued a statement to staff of the trust in which she
said she had promised to look into the concerns of the group of consultants that
had been to see her. But she said she had "not been forwarded the letter
referred to in the media". She added that Dr Collins and her management team
"have the complete support of the Board". It is understood some of the letters
signed by the disaffected 42 consultants expressed no confidence in Dr Collins
but others aimed at other managers or made lesser demands. Leaders of the trust
will be hoping next Tuesday's meeting of the whole consultant body draws a line
under the protest. But it is unlikely to settle all the issues around Great
Ormond Street.

   While it does extraordinary work, some consultants, although at the pinnacle
of their careers, express a sense of embarrassment that the trust is not living
up to its reputation. The hospital enjoys a massive charitable income -
contributing £126m to the £321m cost of its redevelopment project (and a target
to raise another £120m by completion due in 2016).

   A spokesman said the trust "absolutely refuted" all charges of a bullying
culture. Its downgrading to "fair" on the quality assessment was attributable to
30 children needing spinal operations, where there was a shortage of surgeons,
breaching the waiting time limit, he said. With an improving financial position
and high levels of patient satisfaction, its worst problems were over.

   A PROUD HISTORY

   * Great Ormond Street Hospital was founded as the Hospital for Sick Children
by Dr Charles West in 1852 in a modest 17th-century townhouse. It was the first
children-only hospital in Britain, run as a charitable foundation for the poor.
It provided training and education and Dr West wrote a handbook on paediatric
nursing before Florence Nightgale wrote hers.

   * In 1929, J M Barrie bequeathed the copyright of Peter Pan to the hospital
for the remainder of his lifetime and the bequest was extended in his will. A
condition of the bequest was that the sum was never disclosed but it is
understood to form only a small part of the trust's overall charitable income.

   * In 1940, the patients were evacuated to Tadworth Court, an annexe in
Surrey, and other temporary accommodation outside London, and the hospital was
used as a casualty clearing station for the local population during the Blitz. A
newly-completed wing was seriously damaged by bombing and was narrowly saved
from complete destruction when stoker William Pendle was able to turn off the
hospital's flooded and damaged boilers before they exploded.

   * The hospital became part of the NHS at its foundation in 1948. It has
scored a number of firsts including the first successful gene therapy trial and
the first stem cell supported trachea transplant. It runs the biggest heart
transplant centre for children in world. The hospital staff of 20 in 1860 has
grown to 3,500 today who treat more than 100,000 patients a year.

LOAD-DATE: June 10, 2010


                              39 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2010 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                              All Rights Reserved
                            The Independent (London)

                             April 6, 2010 Tuesday
                                 First Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 931 words

HEADLINE: From porn director to university don, the candidates boarding Clegg's
bus;
In the final part of our series, Michael Savage looks at the Liberal Democrats
challenging to become MPs

BYLINE: Michael Savage

BODY:

   FOR THE next few weeks, the Liberal Democrats will not be able to avoid
repeated questions about which party leader they would like to see heading to
Downing Street in the event of a hung parliament. But when it comes to their
strategy for picking up seats at the next election, there is no doubt about the
electoral rival in their sights.

   Yesterday, the party parked its tanks on Labour's lawn. The tank in question
was actually a canary-yellow election battle bus, emblazoned with the images of
two unlikely guerrilla warriors, Nick Clegg and Vince Cable. The sight of the
coach pulling into the marginal constituency of Hampstead and Kilburn marked the
start of the party's election campaign. It also signalled Mr Clegg's intent to
wrest the seat from Labour as he used the event to boost the profile of his
candidate, Ed Fordham.

   With the Tories resurgent, Mr Clegg's party is hoping to offset the
Conservative onslaught by taking advantage of Labour's unpopularity. Candidates
in close contest with Labour have been instructed to focus on two policies aimed
at wavering Labour voters - their "mansion tax" on properties worth more than
£2m and a pledge that no one will pay income tax on the first £10,000 they earn.
The party has opted for experience to hammer home the message. Like Mr Fordham,
many of the candidates in the target seats are experienced campaigners who have
been given years to get to know their constituencies.

   One of its most experienced candidates is standing in Watford. Sal Brinton,
who has stood for Parliament at every opportunity since 1997, has also had roles
on the party's influential federal policy committee. Her wide range of work
experience, from BBC floor manager to venture capitalist, makes her a trusted
voice.

   In Edinburgh South, Fred Mackintosh has been out on the campaign trail for
three years. He is tipped for a top job in a future Liberal Democrat shadow
cabinet. Bridget Fox is also regarded as a safe pair of hands in the party's top
target seat of Islington South and Finsbury. She has already dealt with the
national media and will be put in front of the cameras during the campaign. It
is also the second time she will have contested the seat.

   Elsewhere, the candidates with a strong chance of replacing outgoing Liberal
Democrat MPs are a varied bunch. Julian Huppert, standing in Cambridge, has
interests that should endear him to voters with an eye to the future of "Silicon
Fen" - as a university don, he has specialised in "G-quadruplex nucleic acids",
which have serious implications for gene therapy.

   Among the Liberal Democrat candidates who will struggle to make it to the
Commons - but who might have livened up the place - are the pornographic film
director and businesswoman Anna Arrowsmith in Gravesham, Kent. Columba Blango
will struggle to vanquish Harriet Harman in Camberwell and Peckham, but the
former mayor of Southwark would beat her on the sports field - he was a
decathlete for Sierra Leone at the 1980 Olympics.

   In the yellow corner

   'I care deeply about human rights'

   Steve Goddard

   Oxford East

   Came within 1,000 votes of winning the seat from Labour last time, earning a
swing of more than 11 per cent. Chances of winning have been boosted by the
withdrawal of the Green Party candidate, the human-rights campaigner Peter
Tatchell. He says: "I care deeply about human rights and social justice and I
have a record of campaigning to protect our environment and fight climate
change."

   Fred Mackintosh

   Edinburgh South

   Labour's Nigel Griffiths is standing down, giving Mackintosh a head start -
he has been working in the constituency for three years. Nick Clegg has visited
and has cited him as a rising star. Strongly against the replacement of the
Trident nuclear programme and opposed to tuition fees. He says: "The war in Iraq
and the attack on civil liberties has renewed my national political
enthusiasms."

   Bridget Fox

   Islington South and Finsbury

   Second attempt to win the seat. Fighting a fierce campaign against the
closure of a local hospital unit. Also battling against the Government's Digital
Economy Bill, designed to clamp down on online piracy by cutting off offenders
from the internet. She says: "It's pretty much, 'You're sick of Labour, there's
no point voting Tory here and we've got good local experience on the council, so
vote for us'."

   Ed Fordham

   Hampstead and Kilburn

   Has been awarded the unlikely moniker of "the Barack Obama of Hampstead" for
his work with local communities. Led campaigns against the poll tax in the
1980s. He says: "Most of the seats in Britain are between Labour and the Tories
- but this one's changed. We're in the game here. They can try to dismiss it,
but we're here to win and we're here to stay."

   Colin Eldridge

   Liverpool Wavertree

   On the left of the party, he has called for tuition fees to be scrapped - a
policy Nick Clegg has said the party cannot afford. Benefiting from local Labour
Party division over the selection of Luciana Berger, a new candidate parachuted
in to the constituency. He says: "For too long, we have had only one party
representing Liverpool in Parliament. Too often, Labour has put the best
interests of the party above the interests of Liverpool."

   Carol Woods

   City of Durham

   A local councillor since 2003. Standing for a third time for the seat.
Concentrating on her party's popular tax pledge to raise income tax threshold to
£10,000 to win a seat held by Labour since 1935. Has been vehement in attacking
the Labour incumbent, Roberta Blackman-Woods. She says: "Voting in favour of
changes to the tax rate has been extremely damaging to this constituency."

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 2010


                              43 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2010 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                              All Rights Reserved
                            The Independent (London)

                            January 29, 2010 Friday
                                 First Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 1113 words

HEADLINE: How a classic scare story has kept us gripped;
Jeremy Laurance explains the enduring fascination with Wakefield's research A
fever fuelled by fear and official 'arrogance'

BYLINE: Jeremy Laurance

BODY:

   The last three sentences of Andrew Wakefield's now infamous Lancet paper
published in February 1998 read as follows: "We have identified a chronic
enterocolitis [bowel disorder] in children that may be related to
neuropsychiatric dysfunction [autism]. In most cases, onset of symptoms was
after measles, mumps and rubella [MMR] immunisation. Further investigations are
needed to examine this syndrome and its possible relation to this vaccine."

   With that conclusion he and his colleagues at the Royal Free Hospital London
triggered the biggest health scare of the decade. Hundreds of thousands of
parents rejected one of the most basic safeguards for children - vaccination
against three childhood diseases which can kill and maim.

   But other experts who had not been involved in the paper became concerned
about the quality of the research, which was based on a sample of just 12
children, and challenged the so-called link. Many began their own studies.
Despite extensive efforts, no link has been confirmed between MMR and bowel
disease and autism.

   It is often said that the health scare over MMR vaccine was got up by the
media. As the sentences quoted above show, this is false. The scare was started
by the scientists, not the reporters - including myself - who covered the
ill-starred press conference called by the Royal Free to launch its paper.

   The biggest puzzle of the saga is not how the scare started but what has
sustained it over so many years. Here the media unquestionably played a major
role. This was a classic scare story - and it involved children. Editors were
not going to let it go easily.

   Unlike most scientific controversies, which flare up and die away, this one
has simmered for a decade and may now be fired up again by the preliminary
verdicts in the GMC case.

   Dr Wakefield is unrepentant about his research and remains convinced that
some children are vulnerable to damage by the MMR vaccine. But he has remained
almost a lone voice with little scientific support. So why have so many
prominent commentators continued to champion his ideas?

   The GP and author Michael Fitzpatrick, father of an autistic son, expressed
the puzzlement of many when he wondered in his book MMR and Autism: What Parents
Need to Know how the scare was sustained despite overwhelming evidence that it
was unfounded.

   "Intelligent people chose to reject mainstream science and listen to far less
authoritative sources," he said. Why? And what could be done to tackle future
scares?

   Richard Horton, editor of the Lancet, which published Wakefield's paper, said
in his account of the affair that it revealed a society "unable to come to terms
with dissent", and called it a "crisis of rationality" in which the nation had
lost the ability to resolve disputes reasonably.

   The possibility that the childhood vaccination programme might be causing
damage to some children is one of the most emotive in medicine. Parents
wondering whether to vaccinate their children have to make a leap of faith. Once
undermined, that faith is hard to rebuild. Concern about MMR has been sustained
by a mix of public anxiety, mistrust of government health policy after the BSE
debacle, sympathy for a lone doctor and anger at the Government's refusal to
sanction parents' right to choose single vaccines.

   Public suspicion about the incursions of science into our everyday lives is
widespread - whether over the risks of mobile phones, water fluoridation, GM
foods, stem cell research, nuclear power, global warming or gene therapy. People
do not trust the Government to place the safety of individuals above the
interests of big business or the economy.

   Mistrust was fuelled during the 1990s by the BSE scandal, when ministers
withheld information about the potential risks of beef for fear of triggering a
national panic. Television footage of John Gummer, former Tory agriculture
minister, feeding a beefburger to his daughter to demonstrate that beef was safe
came to symbolise the government's cynical approach to public safety. As Lord
Phillips's inquiry revealed, the pet food industry had acted sooner to protect
its customers - the nation's cats and dogs - by requiring manufacturers to
remove the brain and spinal cord from carcasses before processing for petfood,
than had the Department of Health. The department was reluctant to act because
beef serum was used to grow vaccines and it feared any admission of risk could
provoke a scare over the MMR vaccine (introduced in 1988). This, arguably, is
the real - and unreported - scandal of MMR.

   Undoubtedly a key factor in the persistence of the later MMR and autism scare
was what many saw as ministers' bullheaded refusal to provide the three
components as single vaccines, as Wakefield had recommended. To MMR refuseniks
this exemplified the patronising arrogance of government. The Tory MP Julie
Kirkbride caught the mood when she said in 2001, as the mother of a then
two-month old son: "I fully accept that there is no scientific evidence against
MMR, but this is a question of a parent's right to choose. Those who are unhappy
with MMR should be able to give their children that protection. It is very
patronising to say 'We know best'. Parents should not be bullied that way."

   Wakefield had argued that giving the vaccines separately, at intervals of at
least a few weeks, would lessen the impact on the immune system. Other
scientists disputed the claim, pointing out that children are frequently
infected with more than one virus at a time, without suffering permanent damage.
Single vaccines would leave children unprotected while they were waiting for the
next jab, and many would fail to complete the course. In Japan, the only country
where single vaccines were recommended, regular measles outbreaks occurred, and
between 1992 and 1997 there were 79 deaths compared with none in the UK.

   Many in the media saw the official position as evidence that ministers were
protecting the pharmaceutical industry rather than the people. Consumer choice
was being denied and the NHS was treating "ordinary parents" as "second-class
citizens". Wakefield was a lone dissident, bravely defying the mighty medical
establishment.

   One further factor fuelled this heady mix. Tony Blair declared in 2004, after
details of Wakefield's conflict of interest over the payment from the Legal Aid
board emerged, that there was "absolutely no evidence of a link between MMR and
autism" and that parents should ensure their children "have the triple jab
because it is important to do it."

   However, he and Cherie refused to say whether their own son Leo had had the
jab. In the fevered atmosphere of the time, that was enough to confirm sceptical
parent's worst fears.

LOAD-DATE: January 28, 2010


                              44 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2010 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                              All Rights Reserved
                            The Independent (London)

                           January 21, 2010 Thursday
                                 First Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 44

LENGTH: 779 words

HEADLINE: Ignore Wetherspoon's weather worries;
Investment Column

BYLINE: Edited by James Moore

BODY:

   Our view: Hold

   Share price: 463p (-0.7p)

   Stories about pub closures seem to crop up every few weeks. JD Wetherspoon is
an exception, continuing to open new outlets. That's a refreshing change,
although not as refreshing as a cool pint of lager at one of its outlets on a
warm day. Unfortunately for the company the weather has been cold, really cold,
and as a result, people have stayed at home, relying on the supermarkets for
their tipples even more than usual.

   Which is a shame, because prior to the cold snap, Wetherspoon's was doing
rather well, with sales on a rising trend. Just look at the numbers. For the
first 10 weeks of the second quarter (to 3 January 2010), sales excluding those
from new openings increased by 1.0 per cent, compared to 0.3 per cent growth in
the first quarter (to 25 October 2009). Total sales for the same period
increased by 5.3 per cent, compared to 4.5 per cent in the first quarter

   However, for the quarter's full 12 weeks, sales decreased by 0.3 per cent
excluding new openings. Total sales increased by 3.7 per cent.

   But that should not detract from the overall investment case, which remains
as strong as any in a sector which is struggling. The company's debt mountain of
£435m remains a concern but talks over re-financing are "progressing well". It
needs to be reduced (so no dividend) because the terms are likely to be tighter
this time around thanks to the credit crunch. All the same, if you strip out the
weather, the company is presenting an encouraging picture of its operations.

   We've said before that Wetherspoon is the quality play in the sector and the
shares deserve a premium. That said, at 12.8 times forecast 2010 full year
earnings, they are hardly cheap. Last time we looked at the company (in May) we
said hold at 447.25p and they've risen slightly since then. The shares are too
pricey to recommend buying more, but the company is doing well, so stick with
it. Hold.

   Character Group

   Our view: Buy

   Share price: 78p (+3.5p)

   According to the much-loved theme tune, Postman Pat thinks he's a very lucky
man. Shareholders in Character Group, which owns the rights to make toys of the
Greendale postie and his sidekick Jess, may not feel quite so felicitous.

   Character designs, develops and distributes toys, games and gifts to 30
countries around the world. Also on its roster are Fireman Sam, Scooby Doo and,
um, the Terminator. In its recent history the AIM-listed stock has suffered a
few bumps, falling from above 200p in October 2007 to as low as 23p early last
year as the collapse of Woolworths shook the business.

   The group put out a positive update yesterday, shaking off an 8.5 per cent
fall in the toy market in 2009, as it posted a 1.2 per cent boost in the first
four months of its financial year. After giving its products a facelift,
management expects a significant turnaround in pre-tax profits in the first half
of 2010.

   The optimism drove analysts at Charles Stanley to upgrade full year estimates
from £2m to £3.5m yesterday. With a price to earnings ratio of 6.6 times 2012
earnings per share, this looks awfully cheap, although much depends on the
success of new products such as the latest Doctor Who range. Certainly, the
Terminator full head mask and voice changer is a winner (and great fun for
terrifying friends and family), and this year the shares - to paraphrase the
original Arnold Schwarzenegger movie - might well be back. Buy.

   Oxford Biomedica

   Our view: Buy

   Share price: 12p (+0.25p)

   There was a time, not too long ago, when analysts used to say that Oxford
Biomedica was like an onion: peel away the various layers, and ultimately you're
left with little.

   But things are changing for the AIM-listed gene therapy group. Yesterday it
announced that UshStat, a treatment for Usher Syndrome, a rare but nonetheless
nasty genetic disorder that leads to deafness and blindness, has been granted
so-called orphan status by the European regulators. The move grants the company
10 years of marketing exclusivity, and reduces regulatory fees in the future.

   Small biotech companies depend on a strong flow of news to get investors
excited, especially as they are likely to be asked for more money in the future
to fund research, while the notion of a dividend is laughable.

   UshStat is the second of its treatments to be granted orphan status in the
last six weeks after Stargen, a potential drug for treating Stargardt's disease,
was similarly approved. The share price has responded in kind, putting on nearly
50 per cent in the last 12 months alone. Investors should not get carried away.
Biotech is, and always will be, one of the most high risk sectors, but you could
do worse than to back Oxford Biomedica. Buy.

LOAD-DATE: January 20, 2010


                              57 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2009 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                              All Rights Reserved
                            The Independent (London)

                          September 17, 2009 Thursday
                                 First Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 207 words

HEADLINE: Colour-blind monkeys cured;
Britain in brief

BODY:

   SCIENCE Researchers from the University of Washington and the University of
Florida have cured colour-blindness in two squirrel monkeys by using gene
therapy. Experts believe the news casts a rosy light on the potential to treat
adult vision disorders involving "cone cells", the most important human vision
cells. Professor William Hauswirth, an ophthalmic molecular geneticist, said:
"Although colour-blindness is only moderately life-altering, we've shown we can
cure a cone disease in a primate, and that it can be done very safely. That's
extremely encouraging for the development of therapies for human cone diseases
that really are blinding." The finding is also likely to intrigue millions of
people around the world who are colour blind, including about 3.5 million people
in the United States, more than 13 million in India and more than 16 million in
China. The problem hits mostly men, leaving about 8 per cent of Caucasian men in
the US incapable of discerning the red and green of traffic lights. Jay Neitz, a
professor of ophthalmology at the University of Washington, said: "If we could
find a way to do this with complete safety in human eyes, as we did with
monkeys, I think there would be a lot of people who would want it."

LOAD-DATE: September 16, 2009


                              62 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2009 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                              All Rights Reserved
                            The Independent (London)

                            August 27, 2009 Thursday
                                 First Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1131 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy for the unborn;
Successful trials raise hopes for end to inherited human disorders Gene therapy
to 'cure' inherited diseases

BYLINE: Steve Connor SCIENCE EDITOR

BODY:

   Scientists are on the verge of ridding inherited diseases from future
generations with a new technique for swapping genes between unfertilised human
eggs before the resulting IVF embryos are implanted into the womb.

   The technique has been successfully tested on laboratory monkeys and
researchers believe it is now safe enough to apply for clinical trials on the
many thousands of women at risk of giving birth to babies with some of the most
debilitating inherited disorders.

   Such a procedure would break new ground and raise fresh ethical concerns over
the direction of IVF research because it would lead to permanent changes to the
genetic make-up of children that would be passed on to subsequent generations of
the same families.

   This form of gene therapy, known as germline gene therapy, alters the DNA of
sperm or eggs and is banned in Britain because of fears over its safety as well
as the prospect of it leading to the creation of "designer babies". However, a
clause in the new Human Fertilisation and Embryology Act, which comes into force
on 1 October, could permit a type of germline gene therapy involving
mitochondrial DNA - which exists outside the chromosomes - without the need for
changes to primary legislation and a parliamentary vote.

   Mitochondria, the tiny "power houses" of cells and their DNA, which lies
outside the nucleus, is inherited solely down the maternal line. It is estimated
that 1 in every 200 babies are born with mitochondrial mutations, some of which
can lead to serious, life-long illnesses, such as diseases of muscles and
nerves, as well as diabetes and cancer. The study on monkeys involved "renewing"
the mitochondria of their eggs by the wholesale transfer of the chromosomes of
one of their eggs into the egg of a donor female that had its \[Emma Bamford\]By
Steve Connor

   Science EditorScientists are on the verge of ridding inherited diseases from
future generations with a new technique for swapping genes between unfertilised
human eggs before the resulting IVF embryos are implanted into the womb.

   The technique has been successfully tested on laboratory monkeys and
researchers believe that it is now safe enough to apply for clinical trials on
the many thousands of women at risk of giving birth to babies with some of the
most debilitating inherited disorders.

   Such a procedure would break new ground and raise fresh ethical concerns over
the direction of IVF research because it would lead to permanent changes to the
genetic makeup of children that would be passed on to subsequent generations of
the same families.

   This form of gene therapy, known as germline gene therapy, alters the DNA of
sperm or eggs and is currently banned in Britain because of fears over its
safety as well as the prospect of it leading down a slippery slope leading to
the creation of "designer babies".

   However, a clause in the new Human Fertilisation and Embryology Act, which
comes into force on 1 October, could permit a type of germline gene therapy
involving mitochondrial DNA - which exists outside the chromosomes - without the
need for changes to primary legislation and a Parliamentary vote.

   Mitochondria are the tiny "power houses" of cells and their DNA, which lies
outside the nucleus, is inherited solely down the maternal line. It is estimated
that 1 in every 200 babies are born with mitochondrial mutations, some of which
can lead to serious, life-long illnesses, such as diseases of muscles and
nerves, as well as diabetes and cancer.

   The study on monkeys involved "renewing" the mitochondria of their eggs by
the wholesale transfer of the chromosomes of one of their eggs into the egg of a
donor female that had itsown chromosomes removed so that only her mitochondrial
DNA was left.

   The aim was to test the feasibility of taking eggs from women with one of the
150 known mitochondrial DNA disorders and using them to create healthy eggs by
transferring their chromosomes into donor eggs with no chromosomes of their own.
The resulting egg would have DNA from two females and, when fertilised with a
sperm, would result in an embryo which has three genetic parents.

   In the latest study, four healthy macaque monkeys have been born using the
technique. The scientists involved said yesterday there is no evidence that the
procedure is unsafe and that they were planning to apply for ethical approval to
conduct clinical trials in humans within a few years.

   "In theory, this research has demonstrated it is possible to use this therapy
in mothers carrying mitochondrial DNA diseases so that we can prevent those
diseases from being passed on to their offspring," said Shoukhrat Mitalipov, of
Oregon Health and Science University in Beaverton, Oregon.

   "We believe with proper governmental approvals, our work can rapidly be
translated into clinical trials for humans, and approved therapies," said Dr
Mitalipov, whose study with colleague Masahito Tachibana is published in the
journal Nature.

   Conventional gene therapy has been tried in humans for 20 years but changing
the DNA of mitochrondria would raise new ethical concerns. "This is not a simple
form of gene therapy. This type involves replacing genes in the germline which
will of course

   transmit it to the next generation and there are concerns," Dr Mitalipov
said.

   "We are talking of gene defects that cause terrible diseases. So the only way
to prevent these genetic defects is to replace these genes whether we like it or
not. We realise it's gene therapy involving the germline."

   Professor Peter Braude, a specialist in reproductive medicine at King's
College London and director of the Centre for Preimplantation Genetic Diagnosis
at Guy's Hospital, said that the study involved a series of technically
difficult experiments that were meticulously executed. "For the first time,
proof of principle has been demonstrated that transmission of mitochondrial
disease might be avoided. It is a first step toward preimplantation correction
of the serious medical disorders caused by defective DNA inherited maternally in
the mitochondria," Professor Braude said.

   "The transfer of the normal genetic material from a mother who has defective
mitochondria, to a clean donated oocyte [egg] with normal mitochondria would
allow it to be fertilised with her partner's sperm and for them to have a child
free of the mitochondrial disease with the genetic material of the couple."

   A spokesman for the Human Fertilisation and Embryology Authority said: "If,
in the future, safe and effective treatments are then developed to prevent the
transmission of mitochondrial disease, Parliament would have to pass secondary
legislation to allow that treatment to take place under HFEA licence. Any
specific proposals would be closely examined by a Licence Committee to ensure
that appropriate safeguards were in place."

LOAD-DATE: August 26, 2009


                              71 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2009 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                              All Rights Reserved
                            The Independent (London)

                             May 28, 2009 Thursday
                                 First Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 366 words

HEADLINE: Why are these experiments important to science?

BODY:

   Q What have the scientists done?

   A They introduced a jellyfish gene into the DNA of marmoset monkeys when they
were embryos. When these monkeys became adults they produced offspring that also
carried the foreign gene - the first time a "transgenic" primate has produced
transgenic offspring.

   Q But haven't scientists already created transgenic monkeys?

   A Yes, in 2001 the world's first transgenic monkey, called Andi, was created
using the jellyfish gene. But the gene was not incorporated into his sperm.

   Q Why is it important to pass on transgenic traits to offspring?

   A Scientists want to establish breeding colonies of transgenic monkeys that
are each created as biomedical models of human disorders such as Parkinson's
disease or diabetes. If the trait is passed on through normal breeding it avoids
the enormous expense of creating each transgenic animal from scratch.

   Q Why was the jellyfish gene used?

   A It is purely a "marker" that allows scientists to see quickly whether their
technique has worked. The gene from the jellyfish produces a green fluorescent
protein that glows under ultraviolet light. By shining UV light on the animals,
scientists can immediately see whether they have successfully introduced the
foreign gene into the animal.

   Q Is the breakthrough a cause for celebration?

   A It could soon lead to the creation of better and more accurate animal
"models" of human disease because monkeys are closer to humans than mice. It
means that medical researchers could test new drugs and treatments and gain a
better understanding of incurable human disorders. Opponents argue, however,
that animals are not a good model of human illnesses, and the research will only
lead to more primates being used in experiments.

   Q Are there any other implications of the research?

   A Being able to manipulate the reproductive cells of primates will inevitably
raise the question of whether we can do the same - safely - in humans. This
"germline" gene therapy is illegal in Britain because it was considered too
dangerous. But if it can be shown to be safe in our closest animal relatives,
there could be calls to reconsider its use to eliminate inherited conditions
permanently from affected families.

LOAD-DATE: May 27, 2009


                              72 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2009 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                              All Rights Reserved
                            The Independent (London)

                             May 28, 2009 Thursday
                                 Second Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 366 words

HEADLINE: Why are these experiments important to science?

BODY:

   Q What have the scientists done?

   A They introduced a jellyfish gene into the DNA of marmoset monkeys when they
were embryos. When these monkeys became adults they produced offspring that also
carried the foreign gene - the first time a "transgenic" primate has produced
transgenic offspring.

   Q But haven't scientists already created transgenic monkeys?

   A Yes, in 2001 the world's first transgenic monkey, called Andi, was created
using the jellyfish gene. But the gene was not incorporated into his sperm.

   Q Why is it important to pass on transgenic traits to offspring?

   A Scientists want to establish breeding colonies of transgenic monkeys that
are each created as biomedical models of human disorders such as Parkinson's
disease or diabetes. If the trait is passed on through normal breeding it avoids
the enormous expense of creating each transgenic animal from scratch.

   Q Why was the jellyfish gene used?

   A It is purely a "marker" that allows scientists to see quickly whether their
technique has worked. The gene from the jellyfish produces a green fluorescent
protein that glows under ultraviolet light. By shining UV light on the animals,
scientists can immediately see whether they have successfully introduced the
foreign gene into the animal.

   Q Is the breakthrough a cause for celebration?

   A It could soon lead to the creation of better and more accurate animal
"models" of human disease because monkeys are closer to humans than mice. It
means that medical researchers could test new drugs and treatments and gain a
better understanding of incurable human disorders. Opponents argue, however,
that animals are not a good model of human illnesses, and the research will only
lead to more primates being used in experiments.

   Q Are there any other implications of the research?

   A Being able to manipulate the reproductive cells of primates will inevitably
raise the question of whether we can do the same - safely - in humans. This
"germline" gene therapy is illegal in Britain because it was considered too
dangerous. But if it can be shown to be safe in our closest animal relatives,
there could be calls to reconsider its use to eliminate inherited conditions
permanently from affected families.

LOAD-DATE: May 27, 2009


                              81 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2009 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                              All Rights Reserved
                            The Independent (London)

                           February 14, 2009 Saturday
                                 First Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 663 words

HEADLINE: Virus-busting radiation beam offers hope to flu sufferers;
New technique enables scientists to paint accurate portrait of deadly infections

BYLINE: Steve Connor SCIENCE EDITOR, IN CHICAGO

BODY:

   SCIENTISTS have developed a technique for studying one of mankind's oldest
enemies - the virus - which could help them treat some of the most difficult and
intractable infections in the world.

   Viral infections, from influenza to Ebola, have proven to be difficult or
impossible to treat effectively because most modern drugs, apart from some
vaccines, are ineffective.

   But now scientists have developed a revolutionary way of examining a virus
which they believe could provide new ways of developing antiviral drugs that
will work as effectively on viral diseases as antibiotics have worked on killing
bacteria. The method works by shining intense, ultra-thin beams of a special
light called synchrotron radiation on a virus, enabling scientists to build up a
three-dimensional, sub-microscopic image of the protein building-blocks that
make up the infectious agent.

   Synchrotron light is so powerful it allows researchers to paint accurate
portraits of the otherwise invisible biological molecules that form the
protective shells and inner machinery of viruses - the simplest yet most lethal
of parasitical lifeforms.

   By solving the three-dimensional structures of these viral
proteins,scientists hope to overhaul the way viruses are studied and classified.
They expect in the process to invent radically novel ways of fighting them, with
tailor-made drugs and genetic therapies.

   The latest breakthrough came yesterday with the announcement that scientists
at the Diamond synchrotron light source in Oxfordshire have solved the structure
of a biological protein at the heart of the vaccinia virus. That virus is a
member of the family of poxviruses that was used to create the smallpox vaccine.

   By picturing the precise spatial arrangement of the atoms within the protein,
the researchers demonstrated that this complicated poxvirus is in fact related
to a larger number of simpler viruses, which have all derived from a common
ancestor following the rules of Darwinian evolution.

   Professor Dave Stuart, director of life sciences at Diamond, which is
Britain's national synchrotron machine, said the insight provided by
investigating viruses in this way could open up the study of these dangerous
infectious agents, eventually leading to a revolution in the science of
virology.

   "Viruses are by their very nature extremely hard to classify. They are much
more common and diverse than any other form of life. On top of this, they evolve
about one million times quicker than animals and we have no fossils to help us
track their evolution back through history," he said.

   "Determining the structure of proteins is our best approximation to a fossil
record, and knowing more about virus families and the relationships between
these families will help us to develop new, more effective, therapies," he told
the American Association for the Advancement of Science in Chicago.

   It is estimated there are 10 times as many viruses as all other lifeforms put
together, "Yet there is no tree of life for viruses," Professor Stuart said.

   Because viruses are so small and replicate so fast, it has until now been
almost impossible to build up accurate evolutionary trees portraying the story
of how a group of apparently unrelated viruses has evolved from a common
ancestral stock. However, the latest vaccinia virus research coming out of the
Diamond laboratory has given fresh impetus to a new approach to drawing up
family trees of viruses, Professor Stuart said.

   "We have been able to confirm our theories about the vaccinia virus at
Diamond. This is a step towards a reclassification of the virus world, which can
guide the way we think about therapies in the future," Professor Stuart said.
"Currently, with viruses such as HIV, the therapies are targeting the
replication machinery of the virus, rather than their shells.

   However, he added: "If structural commonalities between viruses are known,
these links can be used to create therapies that work on a family of viruses, as
opposed to just one."

LOAD-DATE: February 13, 2009


                              82 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2009 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                              All Rights Reserved
                            The Independent (London)

                           February 12, 2009 Thursday
                                 First Edition

SECTION: COMMENT; Pg. 36

LENGTH: 160 words

HEADLINE: Good genes;
LEADING ARTICLE

BODY:

   GENE THERAPY promises much, but real breakthroughs have so far been few and
far between. Today, though, we have a glimpse of what the future might hold. An
Aids patient also suffering from leukaemia was given a transplant at a Berlin
hospital with bone marrow from someone with a genetic resistance to HIV. The
man, who had taken antiretroviral drugs for a decade, has now been free of HIV
for two years.

   Doctors are, quite reasonably, cautious. They warn that the HIV could return.
Bone-marrow transplants hold dangers of their own, and finding donors is not
easy. But the longer the man survives without antiretroviral drugs, the more
hopes such pioneering treatment will inspire. A one-off operation that would
replace a lifetime on drugs could be preferable to many people - and to
cash-strapped health services. Although treatments developed from bone-marrow
transplants are not cheap, the operation has already paid for itself in terms of
the drugs saved.

LOAD-DATE: February 11, 2009


                              83 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2009 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                              All Rights Reserved
                            The Independent (London)

                           February 12, 2009 Thursday
                                 First Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 842 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy offers hope of cure for HIV;
Doctors rid man of the virus with bone marrow transplant breakthrough HIV virus
disappears after man is given bone marrow transplant

BYLINE: Jeremy Laurance HEALTH EDITOR

BODY:

   DOCTORS HAVE succeeded in ridding a man of the HIV virus by giving him a bone
marrow transplant in what they claim is the closest treatment yet to a cure for
the disease.

   The remarkable case gives new impetus to the development of gene therapy for
HIV which could ultimately replace the need for expensive and toxic
antiretroviral drugs. Instead of taking drugs for life, HIV sufferers might
instead have a one-off treatment that would leave them virus-free.

   The 42-year-old American had been infected with HIV for a decade. He was
treated with antiretroviral drugs in Berlin, where he lives, for four years to
hold the disease in check, but then developed leukaemia. Since being given a
bone marrow transplant two years ago, he has not taken antiretroviral drugs to
control HIV and has had no resurgence of either disease. He is believed to be
the longest HIV-free survivor who was previously treated with antiretroviral
drugs. Full details of the case are published for the first time today in The
New England Journal of Medicine. An editorial in the journal says it "places
further emphasis on gene therapies" for HIV, adding: "The case paves the way for
innovative approaches that provide long-lasting viral control with limited
toxicities for persons with HIV infection."

   The man's treatment began with a search by doctors at Berlin's Charite
Hospital for a bone marrow donor with a genetic resistance to HIV. One of the
strangest features of the disease is the way some people who have been exposed
to the virus on many occasions remain uninfected. Twenty years ago, it was
noticed that certain prostitutes in Nairobi remained uninfected despite exposure
to the virus through thousands of sexual contacts.

   It has since emerged that some people carry a mutation of a gene (CCR5) that
confers protection against HIV. In Western populations an estimated one to three
per cent have the mutation.

   Dr Gero Hutter, a haematologist at the Berlin Charite Hospital, and
colleagues tested 61 potential donors before they found one with the CCR5
genetic mutation, who agreed to the operation.

   The American recipient of the transplant, who runs a holiday rentals business
in the German capital, has undergone regular checks in the two years since the
treatment. The doctors have tested his bone marrow, blood and tissues and found
no sign of HIV. "For as long as the viral load remains undetectable, this
patient will not require antiretroviral therapy," they say in the journal.

   Speaking to The Independent yesterday, Dr Hutter said there had been several
previous reports of patients being virus-free following treatment but none to
compare with the latest case. "The difference is that in our patient we had a
plan. It was not an accident," he added. "It is the longest time someone who has
had antiretroviral therapy and stopped has lasted without the virus rebounding.
Normally it rebounds within weeks. It is the closest we have come to a cure."

   Dr Hutter said a bone marrow transplant would be too risky as a routine
treatment for HIV and too difficult to find donors with the right genetic
make-up. But a modification of the approach using gene therapy to render a
patient HIV-resistant could work, he said.

   Even a costly treatment could be worthwhile. The price of treatment with
antiretrovirals in Europe is Euro 70,000 to Euro 80,000 (£63,000 to £72,000) a
year compared with a one-off cost of Euro 20,000 to Euro 30,000 for a bone
marrow transplant.

   Dr Hutter said: "When I started in medicine, HIV was completely untreatable.
Now the situation has changed completely. Perhaps our case is a glimpse of hope
for the future."

   Professor Jay Levy, an Aids specialist at the University of California, and
author of the US journal's editorial, said claims that the patient had been
cured of HIV would be premature because of the virus's capacity to hide in other
parts of the body including the brain, gut, liver and lymphatic system, from
which it could always re-emerge.

   "Nevertheless, the results ... provide further encouragement for those
examining approaches to treatment that reduce CCR5 expression in persons with
HIV infection," he writes.In 2007, an estimated two million people died from
Aids and 2.7 million were newly infected with HIV.

   25 years of research

   The HIV virus

   * When the discovery of HIV was announced in 1984, US politicians predicted
that a cure for Aids would be found within five years, but it is still a distant
prospect.

   Over the past 10 years, a cocktail of aggressive antiretroviral drugs has
been developed to help keep the effects of the disease at bay. Eliminating it
has proved far more difficult because of the virus's unique nature.

   HIV integrates itself into an infected person's DNA and attacks the cells the
immune system sends to attack it. Once infected, these T-cells take the virus
deeper into the body. Gene therapy is a new approach that harnesses the natural
resistance to HIV shared by 3 per cent of people.

   Experts hope that by tweaking a sufferer's DNA, they can achieve
"long-lasting viral control".

   LEADING ARTICLE, PAGE 36

LOAD-DATE: February 11, 2009


                              87 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2008 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                              All Rights Reserved
                            The Independent (London)

                            December 5, 2008 Friday
                                 First Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 249 words

HEADLINE: Biotech firms 'under threat';
Britain in brief

BODY:

   SCIENCE Britain's position as a world leader in genetics and medical science
could disintegrate within months because there is no money to fund the hundreds
of small biotechnology companies that have emerged from UK universities and
research institutes. A team of high-level entrepreneurs and scientists has
warned Gordon Brown that the biotechnology industry in Britain, which was
supposed to spearhead the country's economic renaissance in the 21st century, is
in danger of falling apart in 2009 because of a dire lack of investment.

   Britain is widely considered to be second only to the US in a field that
covers everything from new drugs based on DNA technology and medical treatments
using gene therapy, to the revolutionary field of stem-cell research. However,
the 22 signatories to a dossier delivered to the Prime Minister and the Business
Secretary, Lord Mandelson, have warned that funding is needed to bring these
scientific advances to a stage where they can begin to make money and create
jobs. Sir Christopher Evans, a biotech entrepreneur who orchestrated the report,
said: "The Government has got to step in to counter a complete market failure.
It would be a shame because it would mean that Britain is no longer this huge
force in medical sciences." The signatories to the report are calling on the
Government to set up two funds each worth £500m to stimulate investment in small
biotechnology companies that cannot on their own raise finance from the City.

   JEREMY WARNER, PAGE 53

LOAD-DATE: December 4, 2008


                              89 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2008 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                              All Rights Reserved
                            The Independent (London)

                           November 22, 2008 Saturday
                                 First Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 1454 words

HEADLINE: Patient, heal thyself;
The idea of growing your own new organ is now a reality. The possibilities are
endless, say Steve Connor and Jeremy Laurance

BYLINE: Steve Connor and Jeremy Laurance

BODY:

   Surgeons crossed another medical frontier this week with the transplant of a
windpipe grown from stem cells - the "mother" cells of the body capable of
developing into specialised tissue. The success of the operation in Barcelona on
Claudia Castillo, a 30-year-old mother-of-two, proved what scientists have long
promised - that stem cells can now be used to fashion replacement body parts.

   The success of the medical procedure has opened the door to other possible
breakthroughs in regenerative medicine - which is when damaged body parts are
repaired in situ rather than being removed and replaced by whole organ
transplants. Medical scientists believe that few body parts will be left
untouched by the technical, genetic and surgical breakthroughs that could
revolutionise medicine in the 21st century.

   The Eye

   British scientists claimed a world first last April after they helped a blind
man to see with an injection into the back of the eye. Steven Howarth, 18, from
Bolton, who had a rare inherited eye disorder which left him unable to see in
low light, improved sufficiently after the treatment to be able to navigate a
maze in conditions similar to street lighting at night.

   He was one of the first three patients with eye disorders to be treated with
gene therapy - an injection of normal versions of the defective gene that caused
his condition, Leber's congenital amaurosis. Scientists at Moorfield hospital,
London, said it would lead to other eye treatments.

   The Windpipe

   Claudia Castillo made history as the first patient to receive a whole organ
transplant grown using her own stem cells and without the need for powerful
anti-rejection drugs.

   Surgeons used a windpipe from a donor which they stripped of all living cells
and re-seeded with cells grown in the laboratory from Ms Castillo's bone marrow.
The transplant was carried out last June and blood tests have shown no sign of
rejection.

   The Bladder

   American specialists announced a breakthrough in 2006 by growing parts of new
bladders in the laboratory from patients' own stem cells and successfully
implanting them. Seven patients given the new bladders had functioning organs
that performed as well as those conventionally repaired.

   The breakthrough demonstrated the potential of regenerative medicine -
growing your own tissues and organs.

   Scientists at the Institute for Regenerative Medicine in North Carolina,
where the operations were carried out, are working on 20 tissues and organs,
including blood vessels and hearts.

   The procedure involved taking cells from the patient's bladder, which was
grown on a biodegradable "scaffold"After eight weeks, it was used to patch the
damaged organ. The repaired bladder was working well up to seven years later,
when the breakthrough was announced.

   The Skin

   Chronic wounds are already treated by grafting pieces of the patient's own
skin, which is usually taken from the thigh, onto the affected area. However,
this can result in unsightly scarring at two places on the body.

   Another technique being developed is to grow skin - dermal tissue - in the
laboratory using adult stem cells extracted from the roots of hairs plucked from
the back of the scalp. Scientists can grow numerous small patches of skin using
this technique. These skin patches can then be transplanted on to the wounded
area to regrow the skin over the damaged tissue without scarring or the risk of
tissue rejection, which occurs when donor skin is used.

   Scientists at the Fraunhofer Institute for Cell Therapy and Immunology in
Leipzig, Germany, have been given a licence to grow skin in this way from
patients with conditions that result in open wounds, such as leg ulcers.

   The Immune System

   The body's defensive system against invading diseases can be regenerated or
replaced in a number of ways. One of the most successful is by a transplant
using donated umbilical cord blood for children with severe combined immune
deficiency (Scid), when they lack the white blood cells of the immune cells
produced by the bone marrow.

   The transplanted stem cells repopulate the patient's bone marrow. An
alternative is to create embryonic stem cells from a patient's own skin cells
and convert them into the stem cells of the immune system, in which case there
would be no need for immunosuppressant drugs.

   The Brain & Nerves

   In one technique, stem cells are extracted from cloned embryos created from a
patient's skin cells and used to create mature nerve cells that can be
transplanted into damaged areas of the brain. Another strategy is to block
production of the protein inhibitors within nerve cells that are thought to
prevent regeneration.

   The Face

   The world's first face transplant carried out by French surgeons on Isabel
Dinoire in 2005 made headlines around the world. It marked a breakthrough
because of the intricate surgery required to reconnect the scores of nerves and
blood vessels which supply the face. She had been savaged by her dog after
taking a cocktail of drugs in an apparent suicide attempt.

   Mme Dinoire, 38, was given a new mouth, nose and chin and the success of the
operation was judged in part on how effectively her new face regenerated to
restore her sense of identity. Three years on, she admitted she had still not
come to terms with her new face which was "not hers, it's somebody else's".

   Doctors at the Royal Free Hospital, London, have been given ethical
permission to carry out a further face transplant and hope to refine the
technique.

   The Heart

   French doctors unveiled the latest version of the mechanical heart last
month, which is claimed to beat almost exactly like the real thing. Made of
titanium and animal tissue, the device uses electronic sensors to regulate the
heart rate and blood flow and is even said to fool cardiologists when they are
shown its ECG trace.

   Existing artificial hearts are designed as a stop-gap, to help people over
transplant operations or while they are waiting for a new organ. In some cases
they are used to "rest" the patient's own heart, to give it time to recover from
infection or disease until it is ready to take over its function as the body's
main pump circulating the blood.

   British patients have been implanted with artificial hearts for up to two
years, before having them removed and allowing their own hearts to pump again.

   The Pancreas

   Doctors have been seeking a treatment for diabetes for decades that avoids
the need for daily injections of insulin. Since 2000, a dozen patients have
received transplanted islet cells, the insulin-producing cells in the pancreas,
from dead donors which have worked with varying degrees of success. The
Department of Health agreed this year to fund further research, involving 80
patients annually.

   Japanese doctors took the treatment a stage further by carrying out a live
transplant, from a mother to her 27-year-old daughter. A section of the mother's
pancreas was removed, the islet cells isolated and washed and infused into her
daughter's liver, where they began functioning normally, producing insulin.

   Scientists at Akron University in Ohio are experimenting with a
"bio-artificial" pancreas - the size of a cigarette coated with a membrane that
holds islet cells and promotes the exchange of insulin and glucose between the
cells and the blood.

   The Ovaries and Testes

   The reproductive organs present unique problems. In men, sperm is produced
profusely and continuously and can be easily frozen and stored.

   Women, however, only produce one or two mature egg cells each month and their
reproductive life ends at the menopause. On top of this, egg cells are difficult
to freeze. For infertile men and women who cannot produce any sperm or eggs,
there is the possibility of creating the sex cells - gametes - in the laboratory
from skin cells. The idea is to use the skin cells to create cloned embryos by
inserting the cell nucleus into donor egg cells that have had their own nucleus
removed.

   After extracting embryonic stem cells from the three-day-old cloned embryos,
scientists hope to stimulate them with nutrients and messenger chemicals to
develop into mature sperm or eggs which crucially have half the number of
chromosomes as the skin cells from which they were derived. Several research
groups have achieved this stage of successful "haploidisation" in animals and
are hoping to do the same with human skin cells to produce viable sperm or eggs.

   Muscle

   Duchenne muscular dystrophy is caused by a person's inability to produce a
muscle protein called dystrophin. Scientists know how to make healthy versions
of the dystrophin gene, and hope to find ways of inserting it into the affected
muscles, and thus getting these damaged cells to behave normally. Gene therapy
research is also looking at ways of boosting muscle size and strength.

LOAD-DATE: November 21, 2008


                             106 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2008 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                              All Rights Reserved
                            The Independent (London)

                            August 28, 2008 Thursday
                                 First Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 190 words

HEADLINE: Inner-ear hair cells offer hope for hard of hearing

BYLINE: Steve Connor

BODY:

   The delicate hair cells of the inner ear that are crucial to hearing have
been grown successfully in mice for the first time by scientists who believe
that the technique may one day be used to restore hearing in profoundly deaf
people.

   Many problems with hearing are due to defective auditory hair cells, which
mammals cannot normally regenerate. In humans, hair cells are naturally lost
during a lifetime, causing a corresponding loss of hearing with age. So being
able to grow them by a form of gene therapy raises the prospect of being able to
treat deafness in a radically different way.

   The scientists stimulated the growth of new hair cells in the inner ear of
the mice by transferring a key gene into the cochlea - the auditory part of the
inner ear - triggering the development of the fine, sensory cells that respond
to sound waves of different frequencies.

   The study, printed in the journal Nature, was carried out on mice embryos in
the womb. "This is just the first step," said John Brigande of the Oregon Health
and Science University in Portland, Oregon. "We need to learn if we can restore
hearing in deaf mice by gene transfer."

LOAD-DATE: August 27, 2008


                             109 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2008 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                              All Rights Reserved
                            The Independent (London)

                            August 16, 2008 Saturday
                                 First Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 46

LENGTH: 478 words

HEADLINE: Business Digest

BODY:

   Merrill Lynch freezes hiring worldwide

   *Merrill Lynch has reacted to the credit crunch with a freeze on hiring
worldwide, until at least the end of the year. The decision to put on hold any
further hires in 2008 was outlined in a memo sent to employees across the bank.
It said the bank had taken several measures to help manage expenses, as it
focuses on returning to profitability. The use of contingent workers and
management consultants has also been canned. Many investment banks have taken
similar measures, with JP Morgan among those that announced a hiring freeze
earlier this year.

   Turquoise trading platform goes live

   *Turquoise, a trading platform set up by nine investment banks to lure
business away from the London Stock Exchange, went live yesterday in what it
called its "soft launch". The platform started trading in 10 shares from
companies listed in the UK and Germany, and will add shares from other European
markets before going fully live on September 5. Alternative systems set up by
Nasdaq OMX and Bats Trading will also launch next month, providing further
competition to the LSE, which responded last month with plans to set up Baikal,
a high-tech platform of its own.

   Oxford BioMedica shares soar after bid

   *Oxford BioMedica shares leapt more than 18 per cent after it became the
latest company to receive a takeover approach in the increasingly active biotech
sector. The gene therapy specialist said, however, that it had rejected the
35p-a-share, all-paper bid approach from GeneThera as not credible. GeneThera, a
US company focused on animal health, whose shares are traded over the counter,
has a market capitalisation of just $230,000 (£124,000). Shares in Oxford
BioMedica, which suffered a major setback when its key experimental cancer
vaccine TroVax failed a trial for kidney cancer, closed up 1.6p at 10.25p
yesterday, valuing the company at £67m. GeneThera's offer represents a 300 per
cent premium to the prevailing share price, but the British company and many
investors were deeply sceptical.

   DCC to buy Texaco's UK fuel distribution

   *The services group DCC said yesterday it has agreed to buy Texaco's fuel
distribution business in the UK for ¤27.5m (£21.9m). The deal sees the DCC
subsidiary GB Oil take over the Texaco operation, which is owned by Chevron UK
and delivers around one billion litres of fuel and heating oils to 100,000
customers, mainly in southern England and Wales. Dublin-based DCC will enter
into a long-term supply arrangement with Chevron.

   JPMorgan Cazenove and UBS

   *A story in yesterday's paper said that eight people arrested last month for
alleged insider dealing worked at JPMorgan Cazenove and UBS. JPMorgan Cazenove
has said that one sub-contractor who worked at the bank but was employed by
another company was arrested, while UBS has said that one junior member of its
support staff in London was arrested.

LOAD-DATE: August 15, 2008


                             116 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2008 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                              All Rights Reserved
                            The Independent (London)

                             July 31, 2008 Thursday
                                 First Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 38

LENGTH: 596 words

HEADLINE: Business Digest

BODY:

   BP's Russian chief faces suspension

   *Senior management at BP's Russian joint venture are facing further fines,
and even possible suspension, after the Kremlin Labour Inspectorate's launch of
a second court case alleging violations of staffing laws. The agency has
investigated TNK-BP four times since April; the company has already been to
court once, and been fined. But possible future penalties include the suspension
of the chief executive, Robert Dudley, for between three months and three years.
Over the past six months, the joint venture has been rocked by power struggles
between BP and the four billionaire oligarchs whose AAR investment vehicle owns
the other 50 per cent. AAR shareholders claim TNK-BP is being run as a
subsidiary of BP. The UK oil major accuses its Russian partners of a sustained
crusade aimed at wresting control, pointing to staff banned from working and
visa issues which saw Mr Dudley forced to leave the country altogether.

   Starbucks axes 1,000 jobs in shake-up

   *Starbucks is cutting 1,000 support jobs and eliminating the post of chief
operating officer in a move to give founder and CEO Howard Schultz "a direct
line of sight" into the coffee chain's business. The shake-up also includes the
departure of the one-time head of Starbucks' ailing US business. Starbucks
shares rose to $15.25 last night from their Nasdaq close of $14.67. The
management changes are the latest in a series of moves at the group, which has
seen profits hit and traffic at US stores lag as cash-strapped consumers cut
back on everyday luxuries such as coffee drinks that sell for $3 to $5. In
recent weeks, Starbucks has announced the closure of 600 US stores, and on
Tuesday it said it would close 61 of the 84 stores located in Australia.

   Ark boosted by good brain cancer trials

   *Ark Therapeutics, the gene therapy group, gave the beleaguered UK biotech
industry a shot in the arm yesterday when it said that the third phase trial of
its brain cancer treatment, Cerepro, has shown good initial results and that it
now expects to be able to market the drug by next year. Ark had earlier said
that the top-line results of the tests showed that patients using the treatment
were on average surviving 42 days longer than people not using Cerepro. The
results come from tests on 183 patients. The company is expected to give details
of another 53 cases early next year, after which it will apply to European
regulators for a licence to sell the drug. Analysts said the drug could be worth
between $500m and $1bn a year. Ark shares jumped 69 per cent to 80.25p.

   General Motors to cut 15% of US workforce

   *General Motors is looking to cut about 5,000 full-time jobs - 15 per cent of
its US workforce - by November, as part of a plan to trim $10bn in annual
expenses, according to reports last night. The car maker previously said it was
planning a 20 per cent reduction in salaried-worker costs, including a
combination of benefit reductions and job cuts. GM has reduced its white-collar
workforce by 40 per cent since 2000, down to about 32,000.

   Rexam profit jumps 61 per cent

   *Rexam, the world's biggest drinks can maker, posted a higher-than-expected
61 per cent rise in first-half profits, driven by acquisitions, but said there
was no change in its expectations for the second half. The better-than-forecast
figures drove its shares up 9.5 per cent to 380.5p. Rexam said it made an
underlying pre-tax profit - profit on continuing operations excluding
exceptional items - of £158m in the six months, up from £98m a year ago. Group
sales grew by 30 per cent in the period.

LOAD-DATE: July 30, 2008


                             123 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2008 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                              All Rights Reserved
                            The Independent (London)

                              July 11, 2008 Friday
                                 First Edition

SECTION: SPORT; Pg. 58

LENGTH: 415 words

HEADLINE: 'If some idiot takes drugs, we'll catch them,' claim UK testers

BYLINE: Helen William

BODY:

   Drug cheats heading to next month's Beijing Olympics have been warned by
Britain's leading testing team that "if some idiot takes drugs, we will catch
them". Professor David Cowan, director of the Drug Control Centre at King's
College London, said he was optimistic the Games would be clean but knew there
would be challenges. Cowan will be travelling to Beijing to help the World
Anti-Doping Agency's (WADA) accredited laboratory during the event.

   He was also a member of the International Olympic Committee's Medical
Commission at the 2000 Sydney Olympics and a consultant to the laboratory at the
2006 Turin Winter Olympic Games. Andy Parkinson, the new acting director of
Drug-Free Sport at UK Sport, hopes sports stars will heed warnings that science
is catching up with the technology they use and there is also a high price to
pay if they get caught. "I think that I would be naive to think that there may
not be a positive test in Beijing but I would hope it would not be a British
athlete," he said. "I think that athletes are aware that if they get caught at
the finish line they will be named in the press and it will probably be the end
of their careers. We cannot guarantee that no one is going to take a short cut
but what we can guarantee is that for anyone who does cheat and gets caught
there will be serious consequences."

   Cowan and Parkinson were speaking at the centre where more than 7,500 samples
from UK sports stars are tested annually. This year that figure includes about
1,500 tests covering every British athlete heading to the Olympics and
Paralympics. It is one of only 33 WADA-accredited laboratories which can carry
out drug testing in sport. Cowan said he was confident that new developments
could make the UK, as it prepared for the London 2012 Games, a no-go zone for
drug cheats. London's approach to doping will be keenly watched once the Olympic
Flame is handed over in Beijing on 24 August.

   A "no-compromise approach to doping" in the current atmosphere where the
political will is strong to make a difference is needed, says Cowan.

   Calls have been made to Government for £8m to set up a National Anti-Doping
Organisation (Nado). Preferably, it would need to be up and running by 2011, for
testing ahead of the 2012 Games, and its focus would be drug trafficking and
supply, prosecuting athletes and getting quality information. Cowan predicted
that gene therapy, a new and sophisticated way of cheating, would not be ready
by the 2012 Games.

   DRUGS IN SPORT

LOAD-DATE: July 11, 2008


                             133 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2008 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                              All Rights Reserved
                            The Independent (London)

                              June 3, 2008 Tuesday
                                 First Edition

SECTION: COMMENT; Pg. 28

LENGTH: 1185 words

HEADLINE: As the 100m world record falls again, how much faster can humans run?;

The big question

BYLINE: MIKE ROWBOTTOM ATHLETICS CORRESPONDENT

BODY:

   Why are we asking this now?

   Because Usain Bolt, a 21-year-old Jamaican, smashed the world 100-metres
record in a race in New York at the weekend, clocking 9.72 seconds, two
hundredths of a second faster than the previous best, set by his compatriot
Asafa Powell in September last year. It was the 17th time the record had been
legally broken since an American called Don Lippincott ran 10.6 seconds in 1912,
and the eighth new 100 metres record set since 1991. The 10-second barrier was
broken in 1968, the 9.90 barrier in 1991, and the 9.80 barrier in 1999. Now the
9.70 barrier is in sight.

   Who is Usain Bolt?

   He is a quietly spoken, 6ft 5in student at Jamaica's University of Technology
who has long been expected to reach the top in athletics, having run the
outstanding 200 metres time of 19.93 sec as a 17-year-old. He won the silver
medal in the 200 metres in last year's world championships but then surprised
everyone a month ago when he produced the second-fastest 100 metres of all time
- 9.76 sec - in what was only his third serious race at the distance.

   Bolt's coach, Glen Mills, wanted him to run 400 metres rather than 100-metre
races this year in preparation for the Olympic 200-metre event in Beijing, but
Bolt hates the longer distance, and when Mills said he could run 100 metres if
he beat the Jamaican 200-metre record, his athlete duly obliged.

   Does Bolt's height give him an edge?

   It's not that simple in sprinting. "The smaller you are, the more force you
can generate to body mass," says Peter Weyand, an assistant professor in the
department of kinesiology at Rice University, in Houston, Texas. Weyand, who
watched Bolt's world-record race, believes all the runners were moving their
legs at about the same speed, and touching the ground for less than one-tenth of
a second with each stride. But Bolt was able to deliver more force to the ground
relative to his body weight.

   Tyson Gay, the world 100-metres champion whom Bolt beat into second place,
backed this up anecdotally, lamenting that Bolt's stride pattern was not
quicker, but bigger. "He was covering a lot more ground than I was," he said.

   Could Bolt run even faster in the future?

   Certainly. Although his size tells against him in the start - it's too big a
frame to get out of the blocks smoothly - he can certainly improve upon it with
practice, and will be even better if he sprints right to the end of his races
rather than slowing down to see how well he has done on the clock, as he did
when he ran 9.76 sec, or slowing down and raising both arms in the air as he did
in celebrating his victory on Saturday night. The wet conditions in New York
were also far from ideal.

   So what is the fastest a human can run?

   Broadly speaking, the average man can manage about 15mph for short periods,
while the best sprinters are running, albeit briefly, at about 26-27mph. Not
very efficient compared with a cheetah, which can reach speeds of three times
that. Dogs and ostriches can also put us to shame.

   The title of "fastest man in the world" is traditionally held by the
100-metre world record holder, but one scientific form of reckoning bestows that
title on the former 200-metre runner Michael Johnson, whose performance in
setting the world record of 19.32 sec at the 1996 Olympics produced an average
speed of 23.15mph (compared with Bolt's 23.02mph on Saturday). In terms of peak
speed, Canada's Donovan Bailey is credited with the record, hitting 27.07mph in
winning the 100m title at the 1996 Olympics in a then world record of 9.84 sec.

   So will the record go again soon?

   The days when 100-metre runners used to knock a tenth of a second off the
world record - as Jesse Owens did in running 10.2 sec in 1936 - are long gone.
The record has been creeping down in hundredths of second since Jim Hines became
the first man to break 10 seconds in 1968, winning the Olympic title in 9.95
sec. Bolt looks the obvious candidate to take it down further, but he will have
strong competition from both Gay and Powell.

   Athletics statisticians claimed in the wake of Bolt's run that even though it
was faster than Powell's, the latter's was intrinsically superior, by
one-hundredth of a second, once the different wind speeds had been factored in.
Powell ran in virtually dead-still conditions, while Bolt had a 1.7
metres-per-second following wind. There might be a further challenge from the
2004 Olympic champion, Justin Gatlin, if the American can get his doping ban
halved by the Court of Arbitration for Sport this week.

   What part might doping play in man going even faster?

   Ben Johnson was infamously stripped of his 1988 Olympic 100-metre title - and
world record of 9.79 sec with it - for taking banned steroids. It took another
11 years for another man to equal that time - Maurice Greene, who retired last
year after winning world and Olympic titles, but recently had to deny
accusations that he had been supplied with and paid for drugs.

   With all the bad publicity over Gatlin, Greene and Britain's Dwain Chambers,
who served a two-year doping ban, the world of athletics is desperate for
genuine sprint performances.

   Meanwhile, Bolt responded to the obvious question that followed his world
record by saying that he had never taken any performance-enhancing drugs, and
had already been tested five times this year.

   What legal aids might help sprinters?

   Improvements in track surfaces and running shoes have certainly helped
athletes go faster in the last 20 years, as have advances in training methods
and nutrition. Nevertheless, it is generally agreed that 30mph is the likely
limit for humans as things stand. "We're very close to the edge," says Weyand.
What might yet push human beings beyond that edge, however, is gene therapy. As
recent experiments with mice have vividly demonstrated, this rapidly growing
technology can produce profound improvements in strength, speed and endurance.
It's scary stuff.

   Is the fastest really the best?

   Had Jesse Owens been able to take advantage of the advances in physiology,
nutrition, training, footwear and track surfaces, you fancy he would have been a
contender in today's sprinting scene. And while Maurice Greene, self-styled
Greatest Of All Time, according to his tattoo, may have run faster than Carl
Lewis ever did, many observers would say the latter's consistency and elegance
gave him a claim to be regarded as the best ever.

   Can athletes keep going faster in the 100 metres?

   Yes...

   *Usain Bolt could shave some hundredths of a second off his time by running
through the line and not raising his arms

   *If the race starts being measured in thousandths of a second, even slight
improvements will count as a new record

   *A course of gene therapy could give athletes a new edge, boosting human
capabilities yet further

   No...

   *We're already reaching our top speed. Scientists believe man cannot run
faster than 30mph, with the best at about 27mph

   *We have certain physiological handicaps that will always hinder us. We'll
never resemble a cheetah, which can reach 70mph

   *There must be some point at which the record will never be broken - we'll
surely never see the 100 metres run in five seconds

LOAD-DATE: June 3, 2008


                             148 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2008 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                              All Rights Reserved
                            The Independent (London)

                             April 28, 2008 Monday
                                 First Edition

SECTION: COMMENT; Pg. 28

LENGTH: 254 words

HEADLINE: Clearer view;
LEADING ARTICLE;
GENE THERAPY

BODY:

   Specialists at Moorfields Eye Hospital might not have staged a repeat of the
biblical miracle of giving sight to the blind, but in medical terms what they
have accomplished is almost as exciting.

   Leber's congenital amaurosis leads to progressive loss of sight. It is caused
by a single fault in a single gene.

   Now, by injecting a solution containing the normal gene into the retina at
the back of a sufferer's eye, researchers from Moorfields have managed to
improve the patient's sight.

   The successful result, the details of which are published today in the New
England Journal of Medicine, will give hope to millions affected by eye diseases
around the world. Inherited retinal degeneration affects one in 3,000 of the
world's population.

   Because the scientists were being cautious, this experiment deliberately used
a low dose and was tested on a patient suffering from a late stage of Leber's
disease. Robin Ali, professor of human molecular genetics at the University
College London's Institute of Ophthalmology, argues that "as we move to younger
patients with an increased dose, we expect better results".

   But this research has wider implications. It establishes more "proof of
principle" for gene therapy. It suggests that inserting functioning genes into a
patient's body can work in alleviating suffering.

   This could open the door to treatment in several other conditions, including
blood and immune disorders. Medical science does not work miracles, but who
would deny that it can create hope where there was none before?

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 2008


                             149 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2008 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                              All Rights Reserved
                            The Independent (London)

                             April 28, 2008 Monday
                                 First Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 10 words

HEADLINE: The blind man who was given the gift of sight by gene therapy

BODY:

   Medical breakthrough offers hope to millions

   Full reports page 2

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 2008


                             150 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2008 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                              All Rights Reserved
                            The Independent (London)

                             April 28, 2008 Monday
                                 First Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 916 words

HEADLINE: Injection in the retina allows a blind man to see

BYLINE: Jeremy Laurance Health Editor

BODY:

   A pioneering gene therapy trial has helped a blind man to see in a
breakthrough that brings hope to millions affected by eye diseases. British
scientists have claimed a world first for the revolutionary treatment, which
involved a single injection into the retina at the back of the eye.

   Steven Howarth, 18, from Bolton, who has a rare inherited eye disorder which
has left him with extremely poor vision and completely unable to see in the
dark, improved sufficiently after the treatment to be able to navigate a "maze"
in conditions similar to street lighting at night.

   Experts hailed the research, supported by £1m from the Department of Health,
as a major advance in the treatment of blindness and predicted it would lead to
new developments in gene therapy for other conditions.

   Dawn Primarolo, the Public Health minister, said: "This is a major
achievement for British science and the NHS and shows we truly are at the
forefront of innovation."

   The injection was given into the back of Mr Howarth's worse- affected eye,
which had almost no vision, especially in low light. A video of him with his
"good" eye covered, taken before the treatment was carried out, shows him trying
to find his way through a maze of three doorways and repeatedly bumping into
walls and losing his sense of direction. Six months after receiving the
injection, a repeat video shows an astonishing improvement. He can be seen
negotiating a similar maze in low light in seconds, without mishap.

   Mr Howarth is one of the first three patients to be treated with the
experimental therapy by specialists at University College London (UCL) and
Moorfields Eye Hospital. The other two patients, aged 17 and 23, suffered no ill
effects but did not report any improvement. The results are published today in
the New England Journal of Medicine.

   Results of a similar trial by a rival US group at the University of
Pennsylvania, which began eight months after the British trial, are also
reported in the journal today. Three patients, one aged 19 and two aged 26, were
injected and are reported to have improved vision as measured by standard eye
tests. One showed an improved ability to navigate an obstacle course. However,
one of the American patients developed a hole in the retina, thought to be due
to the surgery, though this did not affect their sight.

   Robin Ali, professor of human molecular genetics at UCL Institute of
Ophthalmology, who led the British study, said: "We are thrilled. We started
with the most difficult cases - with late-stage disease, using a low dose and in
the worst affected eye - because we were being cautious. As we move to younger
patients with an increased dose we expect better results."

   The technique has already been shown to work in animals where results were
better in those with less-advanced disease, he said. It is now being tried in
nine younger patients, aged eight to 16, and the researchers hope for improved
results.

   "It is too early to say anything but we anticipate further success,"
Professor Ali said.

   Mr Howarth, a student and a guitarist, said he had been nervous and excited
before the treatment. He said his eye "felt like sandpaper" after, and took over
a week to return to normal.

   "Now, when it's getting dark or it's badly lit, my sight is definitely
better. It's a small change - but it makes a big difference to me. Before the
operation, I used to rush home from college when it started to get dark because
I was worried about getting around. Now I can take my time and stay later if I
need to, for band rehearsals and things like that."

   Mr Howarth and the two other patients were born with Leber's congenital
amaurosis, an inherited degenerative disorder which leads to progressive loss of
sight caused by a fault in a single gene, RPE65. The operation, carried out by
James Bainbridge, a consultant ophthalmologist at Moorfields Eye Hospital,
involved injecting normal versions of the defective gene into the back of the
eye, beneath the retina.

   Extreme surgical precision was required to inject the solution containing the
normal genes, gently lifting the retina and causing a temporary detachment. One
slip could have torn the retina and destroyed the patient's remaining sight.

   Professor Ali said the treatment had not merely halted the degeneration but
had improved vision. "This is a very significant milestone. This trial
establishes proof of principle of gene therapy for inherited retinal disease and
paves the way for development of gene therapy approaches in a broad range of eye
disorders," he said.

   It is only the second time gene therapy has been proved successful in humans,
after trials showed it was effective in the rare inherited disorder called SCID
(severe combined immune deficiency) which leaves babies without a functioning
immune system so they have to live in a bubble to protect them from infection.
This advance could open the way to treatment in other conditions, including
blood and immune disorders, Professor Ali said.

   Len Seymour, professor of gene therapies at Oxford University and president
of the British Society for Gene Therapy, said: "Carefully designed studies such
as this demonstrate the remarkable power of gene therapy to correct the basis of
many diseases. The encouragement this study will bring to patients and
scientists alike should give increased confidence in applying similar approaches
for treatment of a host of debilitating disorders, unleashing the prospect of
major advances through genetic medicine."

   leading article, page 28

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 2008


                             151 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2008 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                              All Rights Reserved
                            The Independent (London)

                             April 28, 2008 Monday
                                 First Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 536 words

HEADLINE: This is only the beginning of what gene therapy can do;
COMMENT

BYLINE: LEN SEYMOUR

BODY:

   The compelling simplicity of gene therapy attracts great attention, with
interest swinging between enthusiastic optimism when there is dramatic progress
and scathing criticism when things go badly. Calling it "gene therapy" does
imply the approach will work (it's written on the tin), but it has been a long
and difficult road towards success.

   The University College London/Moorfields study is a welcome step forward. It
highlights the principle that gene therapy can be used to improve vision in some
patients with Leber's congenital amaurosis, giving hope where there was none
before. Hope is contagious and many people with incurable genetic diseases will
be interested in these findings, hoping that gene therapy treatments may soon be
found for them. Gene therapy can work, but only when the healthy "transgenes"
can be introduced efficiently into diseased cells. The biggest step in turning
principle into practice occurred when scientists appreciated the need to
prioritise efficient "transgene delivery". In the case of the Moorfields study,
the transgenes are delivered using a vector - a harmless virus that "infects"
the diseased cells - injected directly under the retina.

   Similar effects have been seen once before, at Great Ormond Street Hospital,
in the treatment of children with severe combined immune deficiency (SCID); the
"bubble boys". There, vectors were administered to bone marrow stem cells
isolated from patients, and then reintroduced so that they can repopulate the
patients' immune systems with healthy cells.

   In all cases, it's about efficient transgene delivery, and we anticipate
continued success in other areas where diseased target cells can be accessed
directly - for example by injection in the treatment of Parkinson's disease, or
by treatment of stem cells in other immune disorders.

   Although animal research is essential for most forms of medicine, clinical
trials are particularly important to assess strengths and weaknesses of complex
approaches like gene therapy. For example, the toxicities seen in four patients
with SCID (where the transgene became inserted into the patients' chromosomal
DNA and caused leukaemia) were not anticipated from preclinical studies. Only
because some patients were enrolled in experimental trials have we now learnt
the importance of making safer vectors for SCID, and future trials will be
conducted using these new vectors. SCID is a life-threatening disease, and for
patients without bone marrow donors, gene therapy now provides a remarkable,
potentially curative, way forward.

   Applying gene therapy to diseases where target cells are spread around the
body, for example in cancer, requires development of more sophisticated vectors
that can be injected into the patients' bloodstreams and can seek out and
deliver therapeutic transgenes selectively to the target diseased cells. That is
the area where much of gene therapy research is now focused, and progress in
delivery will undoubtedly lead to even more exciting breakthroughs, including in
the treatment of some of the major killers of our time - cancer and heart
disease.

   Len Seymour is professor of gene therapies at Oxford University and president
of the British Society for Gene Therapy

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 2008


                             161 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2008 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                              All Rights Reserved
                            The Independent (London)

                            March 26, 2008 Wednesday
                                 First Edition

SECTION: COMMENT; Pg. 30

LENGTH: 1114 words

HEADLINE: Scientists must try harder to win this debate

BYLINE: MARY DEJEVSKY

BODY:

   Australia is currently wooing tourists with a brazen, and briefly banned,
series of adverts that combine langorous shots of deserted beaches with an
indignant vernacular voiceover. "So where the bloody hell are you?" it asks. I
recalled this advert a couple of days ago when 200 charities and scientists sent
a letter to MPs in support of the Human Fertilisation and Embryology Bill. Where
the bloody hell had they been?

   For a week, the Catholic Church had made all the running. The bishops had
exploited the Church's unique selling point (Easter) to lobby against what they
regarded as ungodly aspects of the Bill. They dominated the airwaves.

   Now, I have no problem with church traditionalists defending their patch:
that is what they are for. What was distressing was the pusillanimous and tardy
response from those with the qualifications and authority to take them on. All
too often it seems that, once the scientists have lobbied MPs via committees and
special interest groups and steered "their" bill to a parliamentary reading,
they think their job is done.

   Let the Catholic bishops' Easter offensive be a lesson. If pioneering
scientists want a larger slice of taxpayers' money and an extension of ethical
boundaries, they will have to work harder to take the public with them. If they
don't, they will risk appearing as obscurantist as the upper reaches of the
Catholic church - and no less guilty of special pleading.

   I have a personal interest to declare here. As one of the estimated 120,000
people in Britain suffering from Parkinson's disease, my husband might
eventually benefit from some of the research the Embryology Bill seeks to
permit. The prospect that tightly regulated experiments with cloning and hybrids
might speed a cure for even some of those 120,000 thus outweighs any qualms I
might have about the presumption inherent in creating hybrids.

   Nor is it hard, from this perspective, to argue that scientists should be
given the benefit of the doubt. In the field of neurology alone, the pace of
advance is breathtaking - even to me as a reasonably informed, but definitely
lay, observer. Less than 20 years ago, when my husband was first diagnosed,
doctors played down heredity. Now, much of the research approved for funding has
a genetic aspect.

   A gene mutation was recently identified that may predispose those who have it
to a particular strain of Parkinson's. Identification is the first step to being
able to reverse it. And now it is reported that scientists have successfully
implanted cells derived from cloned embryos into mice, greatly diminishing their
Parkinson's symptoms.

   Successes, such as these, are invariably lauded beyond the scientific world -
which is understandable, even if there are liabilities to doing so. Excited
accounts of "breakthroughs" raise hopes in sufferers and their families that are
often completely unrealistic: transferring experiments from mouse to man, for
instance, takes a decade or more. And gene therapy is still at an extremely
early stage. Reports that suggest miracle cures are just around the corner are
generally more cruel than kind.

   This does not mean, however, that scientists could not be much more
forthcoming than they are with the information they have at their disposal. Some
strains of Parkinson's, for instance, can be helped enormously by a procedure
known as deep brain stimulation. An electrode is planted in the brain that
substitutes for the missing chemical and negates the tremor that is the bane of
so many sufferers' lives.

   This is something scientists could shout about from the roof-tops; it is
being done with spectacular success here and now. Yet we hear far more about the
(more distant) potential for cloning and stem cells. Could this be because these
are at the fashionable "leading edge", because drugs companies see the
possibility of huge profits, or because this really is where the greatest hope
resides of curing what is today incurable?

   This is a discussion that could usefully be held between scientists,
politicians and the wider public. But how much effort do scientists make to
admit lay people to the inner sanctums of their thinking, in a discursive,
rather than triumphalist way? Personally, I have misgivings about the
all-embracing enthusiasm for stem cell technology. Are there no scientists out
there, who could maybe contribute another angle?

   Perhaps, deep down, my doubts are selfish: applications of this research are
so far away that my husband is unlikely to benefit. I would rather ascribe them
to an inbuilt suspicion of any wisdom that becomes too conventional, and some
knowledge of unsuccessful experiments.

   In the late 1990s, a scandal unfolded at the University of Pennsylvania
clinic, where a young man had unexpectedly died. It turned out that he was an
early victim of failed - and unauthorised - gene therapy. The case drew some
shocked headlines in the papers; I imagine that compensation was paid, and
lessons - perhaps - were learnt.

   Other misfired experiments related to the early use of stem cells to treat
Parkinson's. In these cases, the implanted cells - as I understand it - had the
effect of exacerbating the symptoms. Of course, not everything is always
successful. But my lingering doubt relates to whether stem cells might not
already conceal the "fault" that ultimately gives rise to his disease.

   An easy riposte for the scientists would be to say that lay people should not
worry their heads about contrary data, for a little knowledge is a dangerous
thing. And they might cite a recent finding that it was the more educated
parents who were most likely to refuse the combined MMR vaccination for their
children. The more information lay people glean, they might conclude, the more
trouble they will cause.

   But this should be the absolute last conclusion they should draw. They should
be horrified. For what the MMR finding shows is the dangerous vacuum that is
left when reputable scientists fail to communicate.

   The MMR case has acquired a special notoriety among Britain's scientists.
They are at one in blaming the media for what they regard as ignorant and
irresponsible reporting. Yet if they had done more to understand the appeal of
Dr Andrew Wakefield's argument and the effect that their complacent silence
would have, they might have behaved differently.

   In matters scientific, the British public's combination of scepticism and
susceptibility to simplistic argument is in direct proportion to the failure of
our scientists to engage with us. To alienate Catholic traditionalists might be
judged honourable in some quarters; to alienate the educated public is a scandal
and a dereliction of elementary duty.

   m.dejevsky@independent.co.uk

LOAD-DATE: March 26, 2008


                             163 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2008 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                              All Rights Reserved
                            The Independent (London)

                             March 21, 2008 Friday
                                 First Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 63 words

HEADLINE: Insulin may act against ageing;
Home News IN BRIEF

BODY:

   *Insulin may help people live longer, US scientists have found. A team at the
Joslin Diabetes Centre in Boston found that insulin inhibits an important gene
in the ageing process. In the future it may be possible to manipulate the SKN-1
gene through gene therapy, which may lead to increased resistance to chronic
diseases and influence longevity, they report in the journal Cell.

LOAD-DATE: March 22, 2008


                             166 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2008 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                              All Rights Reserved
                            The Independent (London)

                            March 15, 2008 Saturday
                                 First Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 56

LENGTH: 805 words

HEADLINE: Shire fizzes higher on Pfizer bid speculation;
MARKET REPORT

BYLINE: Nikhil Kumar

BODY:

   The pharmaceuticals company Shire, a perennial target of takeover talk, was
buoyed by renewed bid speculation yesterday. The US drugs giant Pfizer was
reported to be considering a £13-per- share offer for its smaller British peer.
Investors were excited and Shire's stock soared to an early intra-day high of
1,035p - an increase of 92p, or almost 10 per cent, on Thursday's closing price.

   Cazenove, which maintains an "in-line" recommendation for the stock, noted:
"With larger industry players such as Pfizer facing a significant sales gap in
the next few years, we see bid speculation surrounding the mid-cap companies as
likely to continue. Shire has an interesting pipeline with its Human Genetic
Therapies (HGT) franchise expected to provide nearly 30 per cent of sales by
2011."

   The broker also underlined the success of the drug Vyvanse, Shire's treatment
for attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder, which has "arguably been a
success, gaining 6 per cent of total ADHD prescriptions to date since its launch
in summer 2007", according to Cazenove.

   Of course, the market as matchmaker is often unreliable. The bid talk, one
trader noted, was not new and both AstraZeneca and GlaxoSmithKline have
previously been touted as potential suitors. Indeed, sources close to Shire
noted that the company was unmoved by the speculation. Its director of corporate
affairs is off on holiday, The Independent was told. Investors, who took Shire's
stock up by 4.98 per cent or 47p to 990p, must be wondering if he is heading to
New York, the location of Pfizer's headquarters.

   Following news of fresh banking woes, the bears were rampant on the FTSE 100,
which closed down 60.7, or 1.1 per cent, at 5,631.7. The London benchmark
remained firm in the morning but soon slid into the red following reports of
problems at Bear Stearns, the US investment bank, which has sought emergency
funding from JP Morgan Chase and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.

   The FTSE 250 was also depressed, shedding 95.4 , or 1 per cent, to 9706.1.

   Predictably, growing concerns about the credit market weighed heavily on the
British banks. HBOS, which has often been the subject of worrying rumours of a
sudden writedown, was the worst off, down 6.05 per cent, or 34p, to 528p. Others
in the sector were also depressed. Barclays lost 3.94 per cent, or 17.75p, to
close at 433p, Royal Bank of Scotland fell 2.48 per cent, or 8.5p, and ended on
333.75p, Lloyds TSB lost 2.03 per cent, or 8.75p, to 421.25p, and Standard
Chartered closed down 18p at 1,606p, a fall of 1.11 per cent.

   In the mining sector, shares in Xstrata rose on the back of fresh speculation
about a deal with Vale, the Brazilian mining group, which has been working on a
takeover offer for the company. Market sources said Vale had already, or was
close to, winning the assent of Glencore, a major share holder in Xstrata. The
talk also suggested a deal could be announced as early as this weekend, or in
the first few days of next week. Xstrata climbed by 0.43 per cent, or 17p, to
3,938p.

   The rival mining giants Rio Tinto, which climbed by 2.22 per cent, or 120p to
5527p, and BHP Billiton, which gained 3.65 per cent, or 56p, to 1590p, also had
a good day. Lehman Brothers cast the two companies as its top picks in the
sector.

   Supermarkets, on the other hand, suffered after Goldman Sachs said: "A
near-stagflationary outlook is an increasing negative for the food retailers and
different to the positive impact that mild inflation tends to have on the
sector." Goldman downgraded Tesco from "neutral" to "sell", sending its shares
down by 3.43 per cent, or 13.50p, to 380.25p. Morrisons shares fell by 3.88 per
cent, or 11.25p, to 278.50p after its rating was lowered from "buy" to
"neutral". Sainsbury, which was removed from Goldman's "conviction buy" list,
was hurt too, losing 3.90 per cent, or 13.25p, to close at 326.35p.

   On the FTSE 250, Benfield, the reinsurance and risk intermediary which
slumped after disappointing results on Thursday, rose again as investors went
hunting for a bargain. They helped the company to weather some negative broker
coverage from UBS, which reiterated its "sell" stance on the stock. Benfield's
shares closed at the top of the FTSE 250 leaderboard, gaining 7.37 per cent, or
17p, to 247.75p.

   Bargain-hunters also helped the gaming company Rank, which was suffering
post-Budget depression after the Chancellor failed to remove VAT from bingo
charges and raised the duty on amusement machine licences instead. Rank's shares
rallied by 4.50 per cent, or 3.75p, to close at 87p.

   On the AIM, the online direct marketing specialist TMN rose after saying
that, following an approach by Tangent Communications this week, it had been
contacted by "several parties expressing interest in acquiring the company".
TMN's shares rose by 8.82 per cent, or 4.5p, to 55.5p.

LOAD-DATE: March 15, 2008


                             173 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2008 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                              All Rights Reserved
                            The Independent (London)

                           February 16, 2008 Saturday
                                 First Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 976 words

HEADLINE: Computers 'to match human brains by 2030'

BYLINE: Steve Connor Science Editor in Boston

BODY:

   Computer power will match the intelligence of human beings within the next 20
years because of the accelerating speed at which technology is advancing,
according to a leading scientific "futurologist".

   There will be 32 times more technical progress during the next half century
than there was in the entire 20th century, and one of the outcomes is that
artificial intelligence could be on a par with human intellect by the 2020s,
said the American computer guru Ray Kurzweil.

   Machines will rapidly overtake humans in their intellectual abilities and
will soon be able to solve some of the most intractable problems of the 21st
century, said Dr Kurzweil, one of 18 maverick thinkers chosen to identify the
greatest technological challenges facing humanity.

   Dr Kurzweil is considered one of the most radical figures in the field of
technological prediction. His credentials stem from being a pioneer in various
fields of computing, such as optical character recognition - the technology
behind CDs - and automatic speech recognition by machine.

   His address yesterday to the American Association for the Advancement of
Science (AAAS) portrayed a future where machine intelligence will far surpass
that of the human brain as they learn how to communicate, teach and replicate
among themselves.

   Central to his thesis is the idea that silicon-based technology follows the
"law of accelerating returns". The computer chip, for instance, has doubled in
power every two years for the past half century, which has led to an ever-
accelerating progression - and miniaturisation - in all chip-based technologies.

   Dr Kurzweil told the annual meeting of the AAAS in Boston: "The paradigm
shift rate is now doubling every decade, so the next half century will see 32
times more technical progress than the last half century. Computation,
communication, biological technologies - for example, DNA sequencing - brain
scanning, knowledge of the human brain, and human knowledge in general are all
accelerating at an ever-faster pace, generally doubling price-performance,
capacity and bandwidth every year."

   Computers have so far been based on two-dimensional chips made from silicon,
but there are developments already well advanced to make three-dimensional chips
with vastly improved performances, and even to construct them out of biological
molecules that can be miniaturised even more than metal-based computer chips.

   "Three-dimensional, molecular computing will provide the hardware for
human-level 'strong artificial intelligence' by the 2020s. The more important
software insights will be gained in part from the reverse engineering of the
human brain, a process well under way. Already, two dozen regions of the human
brain have been modelled and simulated," he said.

   Although the brain cannot match computers in terms of the straight storage
and retrieval of information, it has an unrivalled capacity of associating
different strands of information, to look ahead and plan, as well as performing
the imaginative creativity that is at the heart of human existence. But Dr
Kurzweil is one of several computer scientists who believe that computers are
well on the way to creating a "post-human" world where a second, intelligent
entity exists alongside people.

   "Once non-biological intelligence matches the range and subtlety of human
intelligence, it will necessarily soar past it because of the continuing
acceleration of information-based technologies, as well as the ability of
machines to instantly share their knowledge," Dr Kurzweil said.

   "We are understanding disease and ageing processes as information processes,
and are gaining the tools to reprogramme them. RNA interference, for example,
allows us to turn selected genes off, and new forms of gene therapy are enabling
us to effectively add new genes. Within two decades, we will be in a position to
stop and reverse the progression of disease and ageing resulting in dramatic
gains in health and longevity," he added.

   Rise of the machines

   n The history of "artificial" intelligence goes back to classical times,
although of course it was never called by that name. The Greek myths of
Hephaestus and Pygmalion incorporate the idea of intelligent machines that take
on human form. We would call them robots.

   Mary Shelley took up the theme of man trying to create a living image of
himself in her story of Frankenstein's monster, but the word "robot" did not
enter the English language until Karel Capek's 1923 play R.U.R., which stood for
Rossum's Universal Robots. The idea of a machine being able to match the
intelligence of humans was explored in the 1940s by the great English
mathematician Alan Turing, below, who devised his test of artificial
intelligence. In a seminal scientific paper published in 1950, Turing came up
with a practical solution to the problem - the Turing test. Turing said that a
machine would be deemed to have passed the test if human beings could interact
with it as they would with another person.

   The term "artificial intelligence" (AI) was first coined by the computer
scientist John McCarthy in 1956, and the concept was explored in the 1950s and
1960s by the likes of Marvin Minksy, of the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology.

   The science fiction writer Arthur C Clarke drew on the concept of AI in his
book 2001: A Space Odyssey, which featured an intelligent computer called HAL
that was an intellectual match for man.

   By the mid-1970s the financial backers of the AI industry became
disillusioned over its inability to match the human brain. But then, on 11 May
1997, the IBM computer Deep Blue became the first machine to beat a reigning
world chess champion. This was soon followed by other "intelligent" feats such
as the robot car driver which drove 131 miles along an unrehearsed desert trail.

   AI, portrayed in films such as Blade Runner and The Terminator, was on a roll
again.

LOAD-DATE: February 16, 2008


                             176 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2008 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                              All Rights Reserved
                            The Independent (London)

                            February 15, 2008 Friday
                                 First Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 595 words

HEADLINE: Little hope in finding HIV vaccine, says Aids expert

BYLINE: Steve Connor

BODY:

   One of the world's leading experts on the Aids virus said last night he was
profoundly depressed about the prospects of a HIV vaccine and that scientists
were clutching at straws in their attempts to develop one.

   David Baltimore, who won a Nobel Prize in 1975 for work that was crucial to
the discovery of HIV in 1983, said the past 25 years had been a story of abject
failure in terms of developing a vaccine, with still no sign of a breakthrough.

   Dr Baltimore, professor of biology at the California Institute of Technology,
said some scientists are now talking openly about the prospect of never being
able to produce a vaccine, because of the unique ability of HIV to evade the
body's natural defences over the many years it takes to cause Aids. But Dr
Baltimore said that a HIV vaccine was too important to give up on because of the
tens of millions of people who were at risk of being infected. For this reason,
scientists must rethink their strategy on how to develop a vaccine, he said.

   "We've been trying to make an HIV vaccine since the day it was discovered,"
Dr Baltimore told the American Association for the Advancement of Science, in
Boston. "We've been working on a vaccine since then and we are no closer to a
vaccine now than we were then."

   In his opening address as the association's president, Dr Baltimore said
vaccine specialists had tried two of the customary approaches to making an HIV
vaccine, with no success. "The community is depressed because we see no hopeful
route of success. I should add that this depression is not halting development
activities," Dr Baltimore told the meeting.

   Millions of pounds of research funds have been spent on trying to develop a
HIV vaccine, and the best scientists around the world have devoted years to the
problem, he said. "But all of those things sound like incremental improvements
on zero and, if you improve on zero, you generally get more zeros. So we do have
to be thinking about this in a different way," he said.

   Referring to an American football term that describes the last, desperate
attempt to score from a throw of the ball, Dr Baltimore said scientists are now
"doing a Hail Mary" in terms of vaccine research. "I say that because I don't
want to pretend that we have found the route to a new vaccine. What we're trying
to do is to use a combination of gene therapy, immunotherapy and stem cell
therapy, all which are trendy and difficult," he said. "HIV has found ways to
fool the immune system. So we've got to do one better than nature."

   One clinical trial of a vaccine made by the drug company Merck had to be
stopped because it appeared to make people more vulnerable to infection than if
they refrained from vaccination, he said. "We were hopeful that we would at
least see a glimmer of efficacy. Well, we saw a glimmer of its reverse, that is,
there was some evidence that people who were vaccinated got a higher rate of
infection than the people who were not vaccinated," he said.

   "The conclusion was that the vaccine wasn't worth anything.

   "[We] should be able to find a way around Mother Nature, and produce a
vaccine that is effective."

   In 1986, Dr Baltimore wrote a report saying that an Aids vaccine was at least
10 years away, and every year since then, he has continued to say that a vaccine
is at least 10 years away.

   "There are people saying now that it will never happen. I want to take an
optimistic stance and say that this is too important to give up on," he said.

   'We have been

   working on a

   vaccine since

   1983 and we

   are no closer

   now than we

   were then'

   david baltimore

   professor of biology

LOAD-DATE: February 15, 2008


                             178 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2008 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                              All Rights Reserved
                            The Independent (London)

                            January 29, 2008 Tuesday
                                 First Edition

SECTION: COMMENT; Pg. 30

LENGTH: 1107 words

HEADLINE: An old dilemma: who wants to live for ever?

BYLINE: DOMINIC LAWSON

BODY:

   One of the virtues of the internet - for a news organisation, at least - is
that it tells the provider which stories have aroused the greatest interest
among readers. Over the past few days, users of The Independent's online edition
have "hit" one story above all others.

   It was not the tale of the solitary Societe Generale trader who lost his
company $7bn. It was nothing to do with anything involving sport, still less
politics. No, the item which has transfixed readers of this newspaper was the
report that a Dr Valter Longo had managed to extend the lifespan of a strain of
yeast fungus to 10 weeks.

   As an excited Dr Longo told The Independent's science correspondent, this was
a 10-fold increase in the fungus' normal longevity, "which is, I think, the
longest that has been achieved in any organism". Dr Longo's team from the
University of Southern California managed this by (among other things) removing
two genes, known as RAS2 and SCH9 - which cause ageing in yeast and cancer in
humans.

   So we're not just talking here about the creation of a uniquely smelly piece
of fungus. We're talking about the possibility of humans living for over 1,000
years. That, at least, was Dr Longo's claim: "If ageing is programmed in yeast
and the metabolic pathway is very similar, then isn't it possible that humans
also die earlier than they have to?"

   With this claim, it's no wonder that the Longo yeast fungus has captured mass
media attention. Fear of death is the existential angst at the heart of the
human condition: the prospect of eternal life is not just the metaphorical holy
grail of medicine, it is the apparently unprovable promise on which entire
religions have been founded, most notably Christianity.

   In other words, it is held almost as an axiom that the avoidance of death is
A Good Thing: the Best Thing, even. In fact, a certain amount of reflection
should tell us that immortality is not necessarily an unparalleled delight - or
even a delight at all. Jonathan Swift made this point brilliantly in Gulliver's
Travels.

   At one point Gulliver visits Luggnagg, where he is told that, very rarely, a
"A Child happened to be born in a Family with a red circular Spot in the
Forehead, directly over the left Eyebrow, which was an infallible Mark that it
should never dye." These immortals, he is told, are called Struldbruggs.

   Gulliver is enraptured: "Happy Nation where every Child hath at least a
Chance for being immortal! ... Happiest beyond all comparison are those
excellent Struldbruggs, who born exempt from that universal Calamity of human
Nature, have their Minds free and disengaged, without the Weight and Depression
of Spirits caused by the continual Apprehension of Death."

   The Luggnuggians soon correct Gulliver's wide-eyed excitement. He is told
how, by the time they are 80, the Struldbruggs had "not only the Follies and
Infirmities of other old Men, but many more which arose from the dreadful
Prospect of never dying". In their nineties, they "can never amuse themselves
with reading, because their Memory will not serve to carry them from the
beginning of a Sentence to the end; and by this Defect they are deprived of the
only entertainment whereof they might otherwise be capable."

   Worse follows: "The Language of this Country being always upon the Flux ...
neither are they able after two hundred years to hold any Conversation (farther
than a few general words) with their Neighbours the Mortals; and thus they lye
under the Disadvantage of living like Foreigners in their own Country."

   This is a terrifyingly accurate description of the plight of many extremely
old people of in the Britain of 2008. For modern medicine, even without gene
therapy, has led to a general life expectancy which would have amazed Swift.
Those who are not suffering from any form of dementia are indeed aware of being
"foreigners" in their own country. It is not a recipe for happiness, especially
as they can never return, like tourists from an unfortunate journey, to the
country as they remember it.

   Scientists such as Dr Longo will protest, reasonably enough, that this is not
at all what their experiments are designed to perpetuate. They are not simply
trying to find ways of making us all live much longer. They are actually
attempting to reverse the ageing process, so that at the age of 200, for
example, we would have the health and aptitude now associated with early middle
age.

   This holds out the prospect of a much more beneficent outcome than that
endured by the Struldbruggs. Yet even this is no Nirvana. More modern writers
than Swift have encapsulated the problem: in Karel Capek's The Makropulos
Affair, a 337-year old character, Emilia, complains that "No one can love for
300 years ... and then everything tires one. And then you find out that there is
nothing at all."

   It will be objected to this complaint that there is nothing to stop Emilia,
or any other healthy 337 year old, from committing suicide. Yet if suicide is
the appropriate answer, then this is not such a happy future world. In fact,
suicide would not necessarily be the worst outcome. It is easy to imagine how
the demands of the younger generation - the thrusting young things in their 150s
- would lead to a policy of involuntary euthanasia.

   The alternative would be a country full of frustrated people like Prince
Charles, who this week achieved the dubious record of becoming the
longest-serving heir to the British throne. Another hundred years of waiting,
and the man who would be King would definitively have gone round the bend.

   Rights of succession apart, we would enter a world in which there was a
combination of extreme longevity and minimal procreativity. This, after all, is
what evolutionary science predicts: it has already demonstrated that the shorter
the life expectancy of any creature - both human and non-human - the earlier and
more frequent is the reproductive process.

   It can be argued that an extraordinarily long life combined with minimal
reproduction is no worse than the opposite (an alternative fate which we can
witness in some unfortunate parts of Africa).

   Yet I can't help thinking that scientists above all should recognise the
benefits of generational change; the great breakthroughs in mathematics, physics
- and medicine - have been the products of relatively youthful minds,
unconstrained by the ingrained preconceptions of age and habit. If we grind to a
halt as a reproductive species - satisfied with the prospect of permanent tenure
for those of us currently on the planet - then the prospect is not so much one
of a uniquely evolved, self-modified life form, as of an evolutionary dead-end.

   d.lawson@independent.co.uk

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 2008


                             182 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2007 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                              All Rights Reserved
                            The Independent (London)

                          December 19, 2007 Wednesday
                                 First Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 65 words

HEADLINE: 'Boy in bubble' gets leukaemia;
Home News IN BRIEF

BODY:

   n A boy with no immune system being treated with a pioneering gene therapy at
Great Ormond Street Hospital in London has developed leukaemia. The
three-year-old was diagnosed with the bone marrow cancer two years after
successful treatment for X-SCID, called "boy in the bubble syndrome". Doctors
say leukaemia is a recognised risk of the treatment. Similar therapy in France
was halted in 2002.

LOAD-DATE: December 19, 2007


                             198 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2007 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                              All Rights Reserved
                            The Independent (London)

                            November 2, 2007 Friday
                                 First Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 1102 words

HEADLINE: Creation of 'supermouse' is giant leap with potentially alarming
implications;
THE MOUSE THAT SHOOK THE WORLD

BODY:

   By Steve ConnorScience Editor

   Scientists have been astounded by the creation of a genetically modified
"supermouse" with extraordinary physical abilities - comparable to the
performance of the very best athletes - raising the prospect that the discovery
may one day be used to transform people's capacities.

   The mouse (pictured on the front page) can run up to six kilometres (3.7
miles) at a speed of 20 metres per minute for five hours or more without
stopping. Scientists said that this was equivalent of a man cycling at speed up
an Alpine mountain without a break. Although it eats up to 60 per cent more food
than an ordinary mouse, the modified mouse does not put on weight. It also lives
longer and enjoys an active sex life well into old age - being capable of
breeding at three times the normal maximum age.

   American scientists who created the mice - they now have a breeding colony of
500 - said that they were stunned by their abilities, especially given that the
animals came about as a result of a standard genetic modification to a single
metabolism gene shared with humans.

   They emphasised that the aim of the research was not to prepare the way to
enhance the genes of people. However, they accepted that it may be possible to
use the findings to develop new drugs or treatments that could one day be used
to "enhance" the natural abilities of athletes.

   The professor of biochemistry at Case Western Reserve University at Cleveland
in Ohio, Richard Hanson, said that the physical performance of the supermouse
can only be compared to supremely fit athletes like the cyclist Lance Armstrong,
who won the Tour de France seven consecutive times from 1999 to 2005. The
genetic alteration to a gene involved in glucose metabolism appears to stimulate
the efficient use of body fat for energy production. At the same time, the mice
do not suffer from a build up of lactic acid - which causes muscle cramps - a
feature also seen in the best endurance athletes.

   Professor Hanson said yesterday: "They are metabolically similar to Lance
Armstrong biking up the Pyrenees. They utilise mainly fatty acids for energy and
produce very little lactic acid. They are not eating or drinking and yet they
can run for four or five hours. They are 10 times more active than ordinary mice
in their home cage. They also live longer - up to three years of age - and are
reproductively active for almost three years. In short, they are remarkable
animals.

   "On the downside, they eat twice as much as control mice, but they are half
the weight, and are very aggressive. Why this is the case, we are not really
sure."

   Professor Hanson, who led the 15-strong team of researchers, said that the
first supermouse was created about four years ago by injecting a highly active
form of a gene for an enzyme called phosphonenolpyruvate carboxykinase (PEPCK-C)
into a mouse embryo. The results of studies on the mice are published for the
first time today in the Journal of Biological Chemistry.

   Professor Hanson said: "We humans have exactly the same gene. But this is not
something that you'd do to a human. It's completely wrong. We do not think that
this mouse model is an appropriate model for human gene therapy. It is currently
not possible to introduce genes into the skeletal muscles of humans and it would
not be ethical to even try."

   However, it may be possible for pharmaceutical companies to use the findings
to develop new drugs that enhance muscle performance, which may benefit certain
patients. Professor Hanson accepted that it was possible athletes might misuse
any future drug developed in this way.

   He said: "It's very possible. It's a different approach to putting a gene
into a human. I would only do that to help anyone who suffers from disorders
such as cystic fibrosis."

   The aim of the research was to gain a greater understanding of the PEPCK-C
enzyme, which is present mainly in the liver and kidneys. As a result of the
genetic modification, the mighty mice have up to 100 times the concentration of
the enzyme in its muscles compared with ordinary mice.

   Professor Hanson said: "The purpose of our experiment was to study energy
metabolism in the mice and the role that a single, metabolically important
enzyme might play in a tissue in which it is not normally expressed at high
levels."

   He said that the physical and behavioural changes in the modified mice were
completely unexpected. Usually, scientists have to carry out blood tests to see
if there has been any effect of altering the genes, but these mice were
noticeably different at a very early age.

   He said: "We could spot them at just a few weeks after birth. They popped
around the cage like popcorn. We found that they were about 10 times as active
as ordinary mice."

   Further research on the mice could shed light on the link between
high-calorie diets and cancer, and low-calorie diets and longevity. He said:
"Our animals live longer and eat almost twice as much as ordinary mice - this is
a model to study."

   A risky business: other attempts at genetic modification

   Genetic modification is a 30-year-old technology that has been used
extensively on a range of animals for basic research and the production of
agricultural or pharmaceutical products. It involves inserting an extra gene or
modifying the expression of an existing gene within the DNA of the animal.
Famous examples of GM animals include:

   The Beltsville pig

   An early experiment involving the insertion of a gene for human growth
hormone into pigs to make them grow faster. They suffered severe bone and joint
problems and could not walk properly without pain.

   Oncomouse

   Created by scientists at Harvard. Engineered to develop cancer, it enabled
researchers to use it as a model of the disease. It was involved in one of the
earliest patent applications on an animal.

   Knock-out mice

   Probably the most common use of genetically modified animals. The mice have a
gene modified or destroyed so that scientists can study the outcome. Has created
a revolution in the understanding of mammalian genes.

   Spider-silk goats:

   Spider-silk protein gene is inserted into goats to extract the substance from
their milk. The silk is stronger than steel, so could be used in industry.

   Spinach pigs

   Japanese scientists have created pigs with an added gene from spinach. They
say it cuts fat - making them healthier to eat.

   Humanised cattle

   A range of experiments have tried to introduce important human genes into
cattle so that pharmaceutical proteins can be extracted from their milk.

   The green pig

   Scientists are trying to introduce a bacterial gene into pigs that will make
their faeces less toxic, cutting farm pollution.

LOAD-DATE: November 2, 2007


                             200 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2007 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                              All Rights Reserved
                            The Independent (London)

                            October 26, 2007 Friday
                                 First Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 62

LENGTH: 761 words

HEADLINE: Rio in grand spirits as BHP 'merger' is dug up;
Market Report

BYLINE: Nick Clark

BODY:

   Several ropy rumours have done the rounds lately and none more so than
yesterday's re-emergence of the mining mega-merger.

   It surfaced with talk that BHP Billiton was preparing a £60-per-share offer
for Rio Tinto.

   One mining banker said the story circulated every so often, but was pretty
unlikely. "While the companies would be a good natural fit, the competition
issues would be immense," he added.

   Rio closed up 3.6 per cent at 4,235p on a buoyant day for the sector. BHP,
which predicted strong production growth in 2008 at its AGM yesterday,
strengthened 3.27 per cent to 1,798p. This news was topped by extraordinary
reports that Xstrata was giving its miners sex education lessons to boost
productivity.

   Investors were checking in at Intercontinental Hotels, the second best
performer on the top tier, after ABN Amro backed the group to offer "significant
long-term value". Some vague bid speculation also emerged in the stock at the
end of the day, and it closed 5.9 per cent higher at 1,095p.

   Vodafone Group was the top blue-chip performer with its shares at a six-year
high. It strengthened 6.45 per cent to 189.7p after strong numbers from France
Telecom. Vodafone has been the focus of some wild rumours recently. Yesterday,
there was vague talk of a bid for Carphone Warehouse - possibly traders getting
their wires crossed over a mobile operator deal the two recently signed - and
talk resurfaced for the umpteenth time that it was to sell its stake in Verizon
Wireless.

   The FTSE 100 was soaring although volumes were thin, with most traders
struggling to explain the bouncing markets. It was up in the morning after an
overnight rally in New York and maintained its strength to close up 94.3 at
6,576.3.

   Among the fallers was Alliance & Leicester. The bank was down 2.99 per cent
at 729.5p, with word it had suffered from a bearish Deutsche Bank note.

   Home builders felt the pain after the British Bankers' Association said
mortgage approvals had fallen 27 per cent in September. Barratt Developments was
the worst hit, down 1.81 per cent to 650p.

   Both stocks were overtaken by Capita Group in the afternoon. The support
services company slipped 5.53 per cent to 700p. The group was smashed after
losing its mandate to manage London's congestion charge to IBM UK.

   Mid-tier investors were placing their bets on PartyGaming as the volatile
stock was aces high throughout the day. The gaming group strengthened 13.64 per
cent to 31.25p as it reported group revenue up 24 per cent to £115.7m. The board
added that it remains confident for the full year. Daniel Stewart retained its
"buy" recommendation with a 38p price target.

   Also up off a strong statement, was Go-Ahead Group which said business in the
first quarter had motored. The shares sped up 5.28 per cent to 2,652p.

   easyJet was also flying high as it announced a deal for GB Airways worth
£103.5m. The move, which boosts its presence at Gatwick, sent the budget airline
up 6.78 per cent to 622p.

   One of the worst FTSE 250 performers was ARM Holdings, as it reported a
disappointing set of third-quarter results. Panmure Gordon said the microchip
company's numbers were disappointing on the top line. The shares fell 3.01 per
cent to 145p.

   Among the small caps, the commercial finance specialist Davenham Group jumped
21.55 per cent to 290.5p after it revealed takeover interest from ACP Capital.
Yet the board added that the approach, which could be worth about 325p per
share, "is not one which fairly reflects the value of Davenham".

   The gene therapy group Oxford BioMedica rose 2.75p to 33.25p after a business
update. It said it was not aware of reasons for last month's share price fall,
and set right several market misconceptions over its TroVax cancer drug.

   Traders were watching River Diamonds Group with interest. One said there had
been a bit of a run-up on scrappy retail buying yesterday, adding that this
could mean imminent news flow. It soared 24.7 per cent to 2.68p.

   The collapse of bid talks dominated the fallers outside the FTSE 350. The
electronics group Feedback slumped a third to 2.5p after a one-line statement
that the discussions it had previously announced, had been terminated.

   Elsewhere, the beleaguered building services company Erinaceous Group fell to
its lowest point yet, down a further 28.99 per cent to 24.5p. This came as
Consensus Business Group, Vincent Tchenguiz's vehicle, announced that it did not
intent to launch an offer.

   Diamondcorp returned to the Alternative Investment Market yesterday after
talks with Sonop over an acquisition were ended. It closed down 4p at 99p.

LOAD-DATE: October 26, 2007


                             205 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2007 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                              All Rights Reserved
                            The Independent (London)

                            October 9, 2007 Tuesday
                                 First Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 38

LENGTH: 66 words

HEADLINE: Shire sells off non-core drugs

BODY:

   n Shire Pharmaceuticals, the UK's third-largest maker of drugs, will raise
$213m (£105m) in cash by selling a portfolio of non-core drugs to the Spanish
group Almirall. The drugs include the dermatological products Solasaze and
Vaniqa and six other non-promoted products. The sale will allow Shire to invest
more into its core product range, which includes ADHD treatments and human
genetic therapies.

LOAD-DATE: October 9, 2007


                             208 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2007 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                              All Rights Reserved
                            The Independent (London)

                           September 25, 2007 Tuesday
                                 First Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 40

LENGTH: 286 words

HEADLINE: Main movers

BODY:

   AAnglo American 3,277p (up 130p, 4.14 per cent) Strong day for the miners,
led up by BHP Billiton.

   APrudential 715p (up 18.5p, 2.66 per cent) Price target upped by Lehman
Brothers.

   AKingfisher 179.1p (up 4.4p, 2.52 per cent)

   Rebounds after losses for retailers earlier this month.

   AShire 1204p (up 27p, 2.29 per cent) Group appoints Sylvie Gregoire as
president of its human genetic therapies business.

   APartyGaming 27.5p (up 1.25p, 4.81 per cent) Maintains last week's late
rally.

   ACarpetright 1101p (up 31p, 2.9 per cent) Possible lingering hopes of a bid
for the group.

   AGame Group 205p (up 7p, 3.54 per cent) Up in anticipation of strong results
today.

   AJD Wetherspoon 561p (up 4.5p, 0.81 per cent) Share buy-back programme
continues.

   ABPP Holdings 600p (up 70p, 13.21 per cent) Granted powers to award degrees.

   ANorman Hay 130.5p (up 14p, 12.02 per cent) Pre-tax profits leap 38 per cent
in interims, group to target Asia.

   AMatra Petroleum 7p (up 0.63p, 9.8 per cent) Reports of talks to buy oil
field from BP's Russian division.

   GBarratt Developments 749.5p (down 36.5p, 4.64 per cent) Housing stocks
heavily sold.

   GAlliance & Leicester 716p (down 21p, 2.85 per cent) Group continues to
suffer as the fallout from Northern Rock rumbles on.

   GRoyal Bank of Scotland 515p (down 9p, 1.72 per cent) Considering sale of its
train leasing company.

   GPearson 750p (down 11p, 1.45 per cent) Competition from News International
after Dow Jones buy.

   GInvestec 481p (down 36p, 6.96 per cent) Down after Citigroup cut its price
target.

   GHomeserve 1704p (down 54p, 3.07 per cent) Disappointing trading statement.

   GPuricore 42.75p (down 3.75p, 8 per cent) Results.

   GLibertas Capital 27.5p (down 1.5p, 5.17 per cent) First half slumps into the
red.

LOAD-DATE: September 25, 2007


                             216 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2007 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                              All Rights Reserved
                            The Independent (London)

                            August 14, 2007 Tuesday
                                 First Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 46

LENGTH: 1025 words

HEADLINE: Miner Kazakhmys proves copper bottomed;
MARKET REPORT

BYLINE: Nick Clark

BODY:

   The market was back with a bang yesterday, up almost 3 per cent, driven by
solid gains among the miners. One of the top risers was Kazakhmys, which closed
10.44 per cent higher at 1,195p. The group had been smashed over the past month,
dropping 30 per cent, but soared yesterday after broker backing and rising
copper prices.

   UBS labelled the group "one of the best value stocks in the UK mining
sphere", saying the price decline had been overdone and cited a possible
acquisition to boost earnings. This view was supported by Credit Suisse, which
called the company "a bargain".

   Copper mining rival Antofagasta has fallen only 13 per cent over the same
period and has a 20 per cent higher estimated P/E ratio for this year. UBS
backed Kazakhmys to target a stake in Kazakh natural resource group Enrc, as
unfavourable market conditions made the stock less likely to list. "Enrc would
in our view be company transforming," it added. Antofagasta finished top of the
table, up 10.48 per cent at 685p.

   Rumours continued to swirl around the top-tier insurers. Prudential was up
23p in early morning trading after supposedly preparing to wade back into the
takeover frenzy in the sector. According to reports, it will wait for Resolution
to complete merger talks with Friends Provident before trying to sell its UK
business to the group. Elsewhere, Swiss Reinsurance was looking at a bid for
either Friends or Resolution.

   ICI's takeover uncertainty is nearly at an end, after the board recommended
Akzo Nobel's 670p-per-share offer. Evolution put out a note that shareholders
were likely to follow management and put a "buy" recommendation on the stock. It
said: "As there would seem to be neither financing issues nor serious regulatory
problems, we would expect the proposed transaction to proceed, with completion
at around the turn of the year". It closed up 17.5p at 642p.

   One trader said the asset managers were attractive, with Old Mutual the
highest riser, after bearing the brunt of last week's kicking in the market. He
said: "These assets were oversold, and are looking cheap." Old Mutual finished
up 5.13 per cent at 159.7p.

   Another heavy rebound was from Daily Mail & General Trust. It has shed more
than 200p since its May peaks and was due some good news. The market backed the
stock as oversold and tucked back in, sending it up 7.25 per cent to 687.5p.
There was relief as the FTSE 100 opened strongly andmaintainedthat strength
throughout the day as markets rebounded from last week's turmoil. There was no
further bad news over the weekend, which meant buyers were in strong supply and
it closed 180.7 higher at 6,219. News from Wall Street was also solid.

   Mid-tier movement was mainly recouping the losses from last week's bloodbath.
The construction group Keller was up 16.8 per cent to 940.4p, although it didn't
make it back to the 974p levels of a week ago. It was a similar story for the
software group Micro Focus, whose highs of 307.5p were wiped out on Friday. It
finished top of the second line after a 16.8 per cent spike to send it to 288.5p
at the close.

   Investors were locking in profits at Forth Ports. The stock had enjoyed solid
support last week with rumours of a potential takeover battle in the offing. It
fell 125p to 1,820p.

   It was an uninspiring day for traders in small caps as the market steeled its
nerves for potential troubles ahead. One said: "Everyone feels there is a storm
gathering and the longer it is delayed, the better." Investors want the time to
move positions around but some felt they were stuck with most of their current
long positions.

   One of the top risers outside the FTSE 350 was the tech tiddler World Trade.
It maintained its strong Friday form, benefiting from market sentiment and
soared by two-thirds to close at 7.50p.

   Management Consulting Group was up after a bullish set of interims. The group
beat expectations to post an almost 50 per cent bump in revenues. The
consultancy, which added that it would re-launch its interim dividend payment,
rose 12.79 per cent to 48.5p.

   The market was not so kind to Daniel Stewart, the financial services group
which also released a results statement. Its shares fell 6.5 per cent after
revelations its profits had slumped from £8.2m to £6.6m. It blamed poor market
conditions and a restructuring of the business. Among the tiddlers, EiRx
Therapeutics closed up 16.67 per cent at 0.14p. The company, which develops gene
therapies to help fight cancer, received a grant for Euro 400,000 from
Enterprise Ireland.

   Main Movers

   Anglo American 2816p (up 216p, 8.31 per cent) Miners perform strongly as
markets return to form.

   Home Retail Group 405.75p (up 28.5p, 7.56 per cent) Rebounds after last
week's falls.

   3i 1067p (up 57p, 5.64 per cent) Weakness in the share price leads UBS to up
rating to "neutral".

   Wolseley 1046p (up 49p, 4.91 per cent) Backed by Credit Suisse

   InterContinental Hotels 1101p (up 35p, 3.28 per cent) Shrugs off bearish
analyst forecast for today's results.

   Friends Provident 4.2p (up 184.5p, 2.33 per cent) Merger speculation.

   ITE Group 170p (up 19.25p, 12.77 per cent) Share buyback helps boost group.

   National Express Group 1147p (up 88p, 8.41 per cent) Up on talk it is
favourite for the East Coast Main Line franchise.

   Cryptologic 1132p (up 122p, 12.08 per cent) Broker backing after Friday's
results.

   Oilexco 590.5p (up 38.5p, 6.97 per cent) Good second-quarter results.

   Pentagon Protection 1.02p (up 0.07p, 7.37 per cent) Contract wins.

   Kingfisher 211.5p (down 3.5p, 1.63 per cent) Gives back Friday's gains.

   Standard Life 311.5p (down 3.75p, 1.19 per cent) Follows last week's warnings
of overvalued stock.

   J Sainsbury 547p (down 2p, 0.36 per cent) Speculation that Delta Two's bid
could be hit by credit market issues.

   Avis Europe 45p (down 6p, 11.76 per cent) Gives back gains from solid rises.

   Admiral Group 874p (down 73p, 7.71 per cent) Profit-taking.

   Hochschild Mining 358p (down 10p, 2.72 per cent) Update fails to set the
pulses racing.

   Galleon Holdings 26.25p (down 2.25p, 7.89 per cent) News that Cheyne Capital
Management has 10 per cent stake fails to impress.

   SMG 45.75p (down 8p, 14.8 per cent) Speculation over short position closing.

LOAD-DATE: September 6, 2007


                             229 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2007 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                              All Rights Reserved
                            The Independent (London)

                              June 22, 2007 Friday
                                 Fourth Edition

LENGTH: 647 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy offers hope to sufferers of Parkinson's disease

BYLINE: Steve Connor Science Editor

BODY:

   The first gene-therapy trial for treating Parkinson's disease has resulted in
a significant improvement in all the patients who took part, with none suffering
any side-effects, it was announced yesterday.

   Doctors believe the trial marks a milestone in the treatment of one of the
most common neurodegenera-tive disorders of elderly people for which there is no
effective cure.

   The phase 1 clinical trial, the first in a three-stage process, was designed
to test the safety of the technique but the apparent benefits of the treatment
to the 12 patients who took part was clear up to a year after they were treated.

   Not only did the patients improve in terms of being able to control the
movements of their muscles, brain scans also showed that there were real
improvements to the nerve activity within the central nervous system.

   Parkinson's disease affects about one in every 500 people, and there are
about 120,000 patients in Britain, with 10,000 people newly diagnosed with the
condition each year. Although drugs can alleviate symptoms, there is no
treatment that can stop the progression of the disease.

   The latest findings, published in The Lancet, are the first to suggest that
injecting genes into regions of the brain that are affected by Parkinson's may
arrest at least some of the severely debilitating symptoms.

   "These exciting results need to be validated in a larger trial," said Michael
Kaplitt, a neurosurgeon at the Weill Cornell Medical Centre in New York and a
member of the team that conducted the research. "We believe this is a milestone,
not only for the treatment of Parkinson's, but for the use of gene-based
therapies against neurological conditions generally."

   Parkinson's results in loss of nerve cells in a region of the brain called
the substantia nigra. These cells are responsible for producing dopamine, a
vital chemical messenger in the brain that helps to control muscle movements.
However, another problem with Parkinsonism is the underproduction of a second
chemical messenger called Gaba which inhibits nerve transmission and "calms"
excessive nerve activity. Dr Kaplitt and his colleagues targeted this problem by
injecting a gene called glutamic acid decarboxylase into the subthalamic region
of the brain.

   "Our hope was that with a single operation to this single site, we could
boost Gaba production and thereby normalise the function of the entire circuit,"
Dr Kaplitt said.

   The scientists genetically modified a virus that had been rendered harmless
to carry the human gene into the brain cells. They injected only one side of the
brain and used this to compare the effects of the therapy with the untreated
hemisphere.

   Standard methods of monitoring Parkinson's patients showed they fared better
as a result of the treatment, with a 25-30 per cent improvement when they were
not talking their usual medication, and a 40-65 per cent improvement when they
were talking their drugs.

   How doctors carried out first gene therapy on the brain

   Patients with Parkinson's disease were injected with virus containing gene
for vital brain chemical to treat symptoms

   PARKINSON'S DISEASE

   Loss of nerve cells in the substantia nigra region of the brain causes fall
in level of dopamine, a key chemical messenger that helps to coordinate
movement. The result is Parkinsonism

   GENE THERAPY

   1 Adeno-associated virus (AAV) is deactivated to render it harmless by
removing key genes Deactivated virus

   2 Then, a gene for human glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD) is inserted into
the genetic material of AAV Modified virus

   3 The virus is injected into the subthalamic nucleus region of the brain

   4 The virus carries the GAD gene into the human nerve cell which starts to
produce the GAD protein. GAD results in an increase in the level of a chemical
messenger in the brain called GABA, which is a nerve inhibitor that helps to
calm excessive nerve activity in patients with Parkinson's

LOAD-DATE: June 22, 2007


                             252 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2007 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                              All Rights Reserved
                            The Independent (London)

                             May 2, 2007 Wednesday
                                 First Edition

LENGTH: 605 words

HEADLINE: Treatment that has potential to banish inherited disorders

BYLINE: STEVE CONNOR

BODY:

   Twenty years ago, it all seemed so simple. If you could find the faulty gene
causing a medical disorder, all you needed to do was to replace it with a
healthy one and so cure the patient.

   In September 1990, doctors tried to do just that on a four-year-old girl,
Ashanthi DeSilva, the first person in the world to undergo gene therapy - fixing
defective DNA with the help of genetic modification.

   She was chronically ill with an inherited disorder of her white blood cells
and a team of doctors, led by William French Anderson of the US National
Institutes of Health, wanted to replace these defective immune cells with ones
that had been genetically engineered with a healthy version of her damaged,
inherited gene.

   Three years later, in 1993, an 18-month-old baby called Carly Todd became the
first gene-therapy patient in Britain. She, too, had suffered since birth from
gene defects in her white blood cells, which affected her ability to shrug off
simple infections.

   In the early Nineties, gene therapy was going to cure the incurable. Within a
few years of Anderson's pioneering operation, hundreds of clinical trials were
under way around the world. It seemed at the time that little could block the
enthusiasm of scientists and the media in the rush to extol the virtues of this
wonder treatment.

   The hype failed to live up to expectations. Anderson conceded in 2000: "There
was initially a great burst of enthusiasm that lasted three, four years where a
couple of hundred trials got started all over the world. Then we came to realise
that nothing was really working at the clinical level."

   The biggest blow came in September 1999 with the death of a gene therapy
patient in the US called Jesse Gelsinger. It seemed that the virus used to carry
the healthy genes into his body had triggered liver failure. It raised the
question of not whether gene therapy would ever work but whether it could ever
be made to be safe.

   At the beginning of this decade, gene therapy was in the doldrums. Hundreds
of trials were under way but nothing very positive had come out of them, and
some had simply failed. One of the central problems revolved around how to
deliver the healthy gene into the right cell of the body without causing harm.
Another problem was how to make sure that the gene worked in the way nature
intended.

   Despite the problems, further gene-therapy trials continued in Britain and
France on children with severe combined immune deficiency (Scid) disease - the
same problem suffered by Ashanthi DeSilva. And in April 2002 the breakthrough
happened. Doctors at the Great Ormond Street Hospital in London announced that
one little boy, Rhys Evans, had been "cured" following gene therapy on his bone
marrow.

   "We're pleased to announce the successful cure of the first patient in the UK
by gene therapy," Professor Christine Kinnon of the hospital's Institute of
Child Health said at the time.

   But later a French child who was part of the trial developed leukaemia, which
was thought to have resulted from the virus used in the gene therapy trial
triggering a cancer gene. According to Normal Nevin, the chairman of the
Government's Gene Therapy Advisory Committee, this was always going to be a
risk. But that risk has to be measured alongside the almost certain death among
the children for whom gene therapy was the only hope.

   Since 1993, his committee has received 138 applications for gene-therapy
trials and approved 112, most of which began after 2000. Many of the trials
involve the treatment of cancer, the quintessential genetic disease.

   Now the latest attempt with gene therapy involves a radical approach to cure
blindness.

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             253 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2007 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                              All Rights Reserved
                            The Independent (London)

                             May 2, 2007 Wednesday
                                 First Edition

LENGTH: 839 words

HEADLINE: MIRACLE IN SIGHT;
A cure for blindness is the breakthrough every scientist working in the field of
opthalmology dreams about . Now, a team of gene therapy researchers at Moor
fields Hospital may be on the brink . By Jeremy Laurance;
Science in the 21st century

BYLINE: Jeremy Laurance

BODY:

   British scientists have claimed a world first for a new form of gene therapy
that could help the blind to see.

   Specialists at University College London and Moorfields Eye Hospital are
testing the revolutionary treatment on 12 patients, who are aged between eight
and their mid-20s, and have an inherited eye disorder.

   The technique has already been shown to work in animals affected by the same
disorder, called inherited retinal degeneration, and their sight was restored
after treatment.

   If proved successful in humans, the scientists hope the technique can be
extended to other forms of eye disease that affect hundreds of thousands of
people in Britain and millions around the world. Professor Robin Ali, who is
leading the research, said it was "very exciting" and represented "a huge step
towards establishing gene therapy for the treatment of many different eye
conditions".

   But the professor warned that the work was at an early stage aimed at
establishing the safety and efficacy of gene transfer to the eye, and that gene
therapy for many common conditions including macular degeneration, which affects
about 500,000 mainly elderly people in Britain, was many years away.

   Professor Ali, the head of the division of molecular therapy at UCL's
Institute of Ophthalmology said: "If we can establish the technique of
delivering genes to the retina, it paves the way for applying it to other
inherited disorders for which there is currently no treatment. Then in the
longer term that could open the way to the treatment of common conditions such
as macular degeneration, for which there are treatments but which aren't
particularly good.

   "The advantage of using gene therapy over drugs is that you can give it as a
single treatment to the back of the eye, avoiding the need for repeated use of
drugs. We anticipate the gene transfer is life long."

   Robert Johnson, 23, one of the 12 patients in the trial, was born with an
inherited disorder called Leber's congenital amaurosis, which has caused his
sight to deteriorate progressively.

   Mr Johsnon is able to see outlines of objects in daylight but very little
after dark and he has been told that his sight will worsen as he ages.

   On the day of his operation a few weeks ago, he told the BBC his mood was
swinging from "extreme nervousness" to "a bit of excitement". It will be months
before he experiences any benefits from the treatment and only then will the
researchers be able to declare it a success.

   Mr Johnson's disorder is caused by a fault in a single gene called RPE65. The
operation involved injecting normal versions of the defective gene into the
pigment cells at the back of the eye. The gene is carried by a virus - modified
to render it harmless - which inserts it into the cells' DNA.

   The procedure had never been attempted before and was the riskiest part of
the treatment, requiring extreme surgical precision. In order to deliver the
gene to as many cells as possible, a large volume of solution was injected
sufficient to lift the retina causing a temporary detachment. The retina is
delicate and one slip could have torn it, destroying Mr Johnson's remaining
sight. Mr Johnson was monitored to ensure his retina reattached within 24 hours.

   James Bainbridge, a consultant ophthalmologist at Moor-fields who carried out
the operation on Mr Johnson, said he was pleased with the outcome of the surgery
but there was no guarantee it would be a success. "It is very encouraging that
we can deliver genes to an extremely fragile site in the eye without
complications. But we don't know for sure how someone like Robert's retina will
behave in this situation," said Dr Bainbridge. The research team has been
experimenting with gene therapy for 15 years but this is the first trial in
humans. Dogs affected by the disorder who were treated with the technique had
their vision improved to the point where they could walk through a maze without
difficulty, which they had previously been unable to do.

   As inherited retinal degeneration is a progressive disorder, the best results
are likely to be seen in the youngest patients, whose sight has deteriorated
least. Professor Tony Moore, a retinal specialist at UCL and part of the
research team, said: "Some indications of the results of the trial may be
available within several months. It will be many months before we have the full
picture."

   The announcement of the trial was welcomed by specialists in genetics.
Professor Leonard Seymour, the president of the British Society for Gene Therapy
, said: "The retina is a really good place for gene therapy because it can be
accessed by direct injection - overcoming the problem of gene delivery. When
gene delivery is efficient, the whole power of gene therapy is unleashed. The
diseased cells in the retina are well documented - there is a good chance of
success here."

   The research is supported with £1m from the Department of Health. Lord Hunt,
the Health minister, said yesterday: "The UK leads Europe in gene therapy with
over 40 per cent of clinical trials, second only to the US."

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             273 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2007 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                              All Rights Reserved
                            The Independent (London)

                          February 21, 2007 Wednesday
                                 Second Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS ANALYSIS / BUSINESS; Pg. 38

LENGTH: 409 words

HEADLINE: Shire in $2.6bn deal to buy US drug firm

BYLINE: Karen Attwood

BODY:

   The drug maker Shire moved to consolidate its lead position in the attention
deficit hyperactivity disorder market yesterday with a $2.6bn (£1.33bn) deal to
buy New River Pharmaceuticals.

   Shire's best-selling drug for ADHD, Adderall XR, comes off patent in 2009
while New River's Vyvanse is expected to be approved by US regulators this week.
The UK's third-biggest drug maker believes Vyvanse will match Adderall, with
sales of $1bn a year once approved, and will become the company's flagship
product. Furthermore, its patent will not expire until 2024. ADHD affects an
estimated 5 million children with symptoms including an inability to focus or
control impulses.

   The chief executive, Matthew Emmens, said the acquisition would boost profit
growth from 2009 by increasing Shire's share of the $3.3bn hyperactivity
disorder market. "Having full control of Vyvanse means we can do it our own
way," he said.

   Navid Malik, an analyst at Collins Stewart, said the acquisition makes strong
strategic sense. "This shows they are being very aggressive about adding new
products. I would have thought they would buy the product, not the whole
company.

   "Shire's track record for bringing new products to the market is one of the
strongest in the industry," he added.

   New River's founder and chief executive, Randal Kirk, has pledged his 50.2
per cent stake to the deal, which requires the approval of Shire shareholders.
There is also speculation that he could receive a counter-bid higher than
Shire's $64 a share. The deal is being financed with $2.3bn of new debt and a
$900m placing. New River, based in Radford, Virginia, and Shire have been
partners since 2005 when they signed a deal to develop and copromote Vyvanse
before medium-stage trial data was available.

   Shire also acquires New River's treatment for acute pain that is in phase II
trials and its "Carrierwave" technology, which it has developed to help reduce
the potential for abuse of drugs.

   Andy Smith, investment manager at stakeholder International Biotechnology
Trust, said the acquisition highlights the undervaluation of great technology in
firms. "Shire has made a smart move by recognising the multiple benefits of
acquiring New River."

   Shire, which also specialises in human genetic therapies, and
gastrointestinal and renal diseases, posted a 12 per cent rise in full-year
revenues yesterday to $1.8bn. Net income was $278.2m compared with a loss of
$578.4m in 2005. Its shares jumped 4 per cent.

LOAD-DATE: February 21, 2007


                             278 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2007 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                              All Rights Reserved
                            The Independent (London)

                            January 29, 2007 Monday
                                 First Edition

SECTION: OBITUARIES; Pg. 38

LENGTH: 1021 words

HEADLINE: PROFESSOR ROLAND LEVINSKY;
Pioneer in immunology who became a reforming Vice-Chancellor of Plymouth
University

BYLINE: Caroline Richmond

BODY:

   Roland Levinsky was an immunologist of international renown whose
achievements included performing, at Great Ormond Street Hospital, the UK's
first successful bone-marrow transplants in children. Later he performed the
first successful gene therapy in children with serious inherited diseases who
would otherwise have died.

   As Dean of the Institute of Child Health in London, he transformed it into a
top-class research institution. He subsequently performed a similar
transformation as Vice-Chancellor from 2002 of Plymouth University, pulling it
up by its bootstraps so that it was zooming its way up the league tables and
attracting high-calibre students.

   Levinsky was born in 1943 in South Africa. His father, a Communist, from the
Poland/Lithuania borders, had fled there to escape the Nazis. In South Africa,
he often had difficulties with the authorities - "We had our fair share of
police raids," Roland Levinsky recalled. His father died when Roland was 13, and
two years later his British-born mother returned to England with her three
children, of whom Roland was the youngest.

   Roland Levinsky was educated at William Ellis School in Camden and then
University College London, where - inspired by the great biologist J.Z. Young,
the Professor of Zoology - he graduated in physical anthropology en route to
qualifying as a doctor. He did house jobs at Great Ormond Street Hospital, going
on to be a medical registrar and Nuffield Research Fellow, following this with a
year's postgraduate training and research on auto-immune kidney disease in
Philadelphia, where he gained the expertise that was to shape his future.

   He returned in 1978 to the Institute of Child Health in London, attached to
Great Ormond Street Hospital. Here he did outstanding research work on
circulating immune complexes, masterminded the successful bone-marrow
transplants for several fatal diseases of childhood and established a method for
prenatal diagnosis of severe combined immune deficiency. He rose to Reader in
and then Professor of Immunology, and in 1989 became Dean of the Institute of
Child Health.

   Levinsky was a great teacher and mentor who also served on government
committees and the editorial boards of four medical journals, and lectured
internationally on immunodeficiency diseases and gene therapy. He co-authored
over 200 research papers, many of them of landmark importance, and several
books.

   When he took over the institute, it was clinician-led and was, says Professor
Andrew Copp, the current Dean, "missing a trick". Levinsky reorgan-ised the
institute's structure and recruited young clinical and non-clinical researchers
from a wide range of fields. This revved up the quality of the institute's
research output and hence its ability to attract substantial research grants
from the most prestigious funding bodies, including the Medical Research Council
and the Wellcome Trust. In 1992, two years after he was appointed, the Research
Assessment Exercise gave the institute a score of three. At the next RAE four
years later it scored five, and later it got a starred five, the highest
possible. It was widely acknowledged that this was a result of Levinsky's
policies of recruitment and reorganisation.

   Levinsky fostered a close relationship between the institute and University
College London, which culminated in a merger in 1996. His administrative talents
were widely recognised at UCL and in 1999 he was appointed Vice-Provost for
Biomedicine and head of the graduate school.

   In 2002 he left London, medicine and his position as second-in-command to
become Chief Executive and Vice-Chancellor of Plymouth University .At his
interview Levinsky said that, if appointed, he would build a strong university
on a single site, relocating Seale-Hayne Agricultural College from near Newton
Abbot and Rolle teacher training college from Exmouth. He regarded his
appointment as a mandate to do just that. He met with fierce opposition from
Seale-Hayne, which, having trained most of the landed aristocracy and gentry in
estate management, had plenty of supporters in the House of Lords. The lobby
even won the backing of the Prince of Wales. Levinsky had abusive phone calls
from local farmers who threatened to dump manure on his drive (they didn't) and
a death threat in the middle of the night (later traced to a student, who said
it was a prank). But, within a couple of years, Plymouth had jumped up the
university rankings, and Levinsky was confident that it would go higher.

   Levinsky also served on the town's strategic partnership, not least because
he wanted to keep young brains in Plymouth after they graduated. He aligned the
university's research strategy with that of the regional development authority,
investing in marine science and technology, biomedicine and health, and creative
arts.

   He found time to take an MA in modern Russian history - to rediscover the
experience of being a student and to understand the political background to his
father's life. He and his wife had taken up ceramics when he was a junior doctor
as they didn't see enough of each other and this would give them time together.
This turned into a lifelong activity, and they sold their porcelain-ware at
local galleries. Levinsky also sailed a 43ft yacht, including a transatlantic
crossing.

   He and his wife were taking their dog for a walk when high winds broke an
electricity pylon and a high-voltage power cable whipped through the air,
hitting Roland Levinsky and killing him instantly.

   Roland Jacob Levinsky, immunologist: born Bloemfontein, South Africa 16
October 1943; Senior House Officer, Great Ormond Street Hospital 1973-74,
Research Fellow in Immunology 1974-77, Honorary Consultant in Immunology
1978-99; Senior Lecturer in Immunology, then Reader in Paediatric Immunology,
Institute of Child Health 1978-85, Hugh Greenwood Professor of Immunology
1985-99, Dean and Director of Research 1990-99; Vice-Provost for Biomedicine and
Head of Graduate School, University College London 1999-2002; Vice-Chancellor,
Plymouth University 2002-07; married 1971 Beth Brigden (one son, two daughters);
died Wembury, Devon 1 January 2007.

LOAD-DATE: January 29, 2007


                             283 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2007 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                              All Rights Reserved
                            The Independent (London)

                            January 12, 2007 Friday
                                 Fourth Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 48

LENGTH: 268 words

HEADLINE: Ark Therapeutics;
THE INVESTMENT COLUMN

BYLINE: Edited by Michael Jivkov

BODY:

   Our view: Worth a punt

   Share price: 132p (+13.25p)

   Ark Therapeutics is leading the way in gene therapy. The health-care company
specialises in vascular disease, wound care and cancer - all growing markets
with opportunities for new products to generate high rewards.

   Ark's treatment for brain cancer, Cerepro, which is in final stage trials,
has no competitors and is set to be the first gene-based therapy medicine on the
market outside China. The company also recently signed a series of marketing
deals for its wound dressing Kerraboot.

   Its other key product, Trinam, is now also about to enter phase-three trials
following a better-than-expected meeting with the US Food and Drug
Administration on its second-stage trials. The FDA ruled that the drug will now
only need a single phase-three trial - relatively small with around 250 patients
- before it heads for market approval.

   Trinam is a therapy designed to prevent blood vessels blocking in kidney
dialysis patients who have undergone surgery. If all goes well it could reach
the market in late 2009 and analysts are forecasting potential sales of £450m.

   Shares surged 11 per cent - up 13.25p to 132p - yesterday on the back of the
announcement, leaving the company with a market valuation of around £220m.

   Fund management giant Fidelity recently invested in the company and currently
holds a 4 per cent stake. It has also been given warrants to buy further shares
at 140p which highlights their belief the stock has considerably further to go.

   With approval of Cerepro scheduled for spring this year and further upside
expected from Trinam, it's worth a punt.

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 2007


                             301 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2006 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                              All Rights Reserved
                            The Independent (London)

                           December 9, 2006 Saturday
                                 Fourth Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 56

LENGTH: 321 words

HEADLINE: Oxford BioMedica secures EU boost for cancer drug

BYLINE: Karen Attwood

BODY:

   Oxford BioMedica, a biotechnology firm specialis-ing in gene therapy, is set
to gain orphan drug status in the European Union, securing it exclusive 10-year
marketing rights for its key cancer drug.

   Its shares rose 13 per cent on the news yesterday, valuing the company at
around £187m.

   BioMedica said it had received a "positive opinion" from the Committee for
Orphan Medicinal Products (COMP) for TroVax, a drug it is developing against
renal cancer.

   TroVax went into final stage trials last month - the first of the firm's
current family of drugs to do so. About 700 patients will be recruited from
about 120 centres in the USA, EU and Eastern Europe.

   BioMedica said it was in talks with several major drug firms over a potential
licensing deal for the development and commercialisation of the drug.

   The group's chief medical officer, Dr Mike Mc-Donald, said the positive
recommendation for orphan drug designation adds further momentum to the
development of TroVax. "It underscores the need for effective treatments for
renal cancer, where treatment options are limited and the prognosis is poor," he
said.

   Orphan status is a category for drugs designed to treat rare conditions, for
example affecting not more than 5 in 10,000 people in the EU. It affords
exclusive marketing rights for a certain period. The agreement will give the
firm and its prospective partner the benefit of accelerated approval procedure
for the drug under the European Medicines Agency.

   Renal cancer represents any malignant tumour with its origin in the tissues
of the kidneys. About 150,000 cases of renal cancer are diagnosed every year.
Some 33,000 patients die from the disease each year in the US and Europe.

   If renal cancer has spread to other organs at the time of diagnosis, the
five-year survival rate is less than 5 per cent.

   Data from IMS suggests that more than 5,000 patients in the UK received
treatment for metastatic renal cancer in 2005.

LOAD-DATE: December 9, 2006


                             309 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2006 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                              All Rights Reserved
                            The Independent (London)

                            December 1, 2006 Friday
                                 First Edition

SECTION: HOME; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 857 words

HEADLINE: Messages of goodwill for Browns over baby's health

BYLINE: Andy McSmith

BODY:

   Sarah Brown delivered an appeal for sick children in the African state of
Malawi yesterday, hours after news broke that her baby son had cystic fibrosis.
The Chancellor's wife told television viewers in Scotland: "I don't think that
any child or any mother should be dying in Malawi due to inadequate healthcare.

   "I know that people in Scotland will give generously to STV's Christmas
appeal. And don't forget to use Gordon's gift aid scheme which adds 28p to every
pound you donate."

   The Chancellor and his wife were said by friends to be positive about the
future of their four-month-old son, Fraser, who has been diagnosed with the
genetic disease. They have an older son, John. Their first child, Jennifer Jane,
died 10 days after being born prematurely in 2002.

   Cystic fibrosis is the most common life-threatening inherited disease in the
UK, affecting about 7,500 babies, children and young adults. It is caused by a
defective gene that clogs the internal organs, especially the lungs and
digestive system, with thick, sticky mucus. This results in chronic infections
and inflammation in the lungs and difficulty digesting food. Each week, five
babies are born with cystic fibrosis and three young people die, 90 per cent
from lung disease. Formerly, sufferers rarely survived beyond early childhood,
but life expectancy has now reached 31.

   It is hoped that by the time Fraser reaches that age, a form of inhaler would
have been developed able to correct the faulty genetic material causing it.

   Goodwill messages poured into the Browns' home after the news broke on
Wednesday evening, including one from the Conservative leader David Cameron and
his wife Samantha, whose four-year-old son, Ivan, has cerebral palsy. Mr Cameron
said: "Sam and I are thinking of Gordon and Sarah and their family at this time,
and we send them our best wishes for the future."

   Mr Brown's brother, John, said: "The key thing was that the baby arrived
safely, given what they have been through."

   Ed Owen, a friend of Mr Brown and former political adviser to Jack Straw, has
a four-year-old daughter with cystic fibrosis. He described the treatment
sufferers receive. "It's a pretty rigorous, heavy-duty regime of medication,
physiotherapy, regular hospital trips, but within that and alongside that, kids
can enjoy a relatively happy lifestyle, and there's every prospect that Gordon
and Sarah's son will have that for years to come."

   Rosie Barnes, the former SDP MP who heads the Cystic Fibrosis Trust, said
although the disease remained a "very serious medical condition", advances meant
the future was much more optimistic than it used to be.

   "I believe Fraser was tested at birth for cystic fibrosis, so it would be
diagnosed a few weeks after he was born," she said. "If that test takes place,
it's very quick and treatment can start immediately. A child diagnosed at birth
and treated immediately should remain quite well." Ms Barnes said while people
in their twenties and thirties were waiting for lung transplants, the treatments
today were not available when they were children.

   Mr Brown, who is expected to take over from Tony Blair as Prime Minister next
year, said after Fraser's birth: "I love being a dad. It's great fun and there's
nothing more important and there's nothing I enjoy better."

   A Downing Street spokesman said anything Mr Blair had said to Mr Brown about
Fraser was a private matter.

   'Fraser has a much better outlook than I had'

   Oli Lewington, magazine editor, 24

   Oli Lewington, 24, was diagnosed with cystic fibrosis at 18 months and
enjoyed an independent life until his late teens.

   He said the major difficulty with the condition was its unpredictability - he
does not know how he will feel from one day to the next.

   Mr Lewington was born when treatment was in its very early stages, but says
things are more positive for babies born with the condition today. "When you
compare me to someone in the Brown family's position, Fraser has much better
outlook than I had when I was diagnosed," he said.

   "He has been diagnosed very early which is vital in cystic fibrosis because
the earlier you start treatment for enzyme deficiency and the earlier you start
physiotherapy for the chest [which reduces lung damage], the less you miss out
on.

   "For my first 18 months I was hardly getting any nutrients which meant I was
very sickly. The early stages of infancy make such a difference to the rest of
your life."

   Mr Lewington, who writes and edits CF Talk magazine, published by the Cystic
Fibrosis Trust, says he has to get used to being increasingly dependent on
others. "As you get older, things get harder. Up to my late teens I was quite
independent and free to do what I wanted to do. From the age of 20, I started to
suffer more infections and worse infections."

   He said trials for gene therapy, which are due to start in April, may be of
no use to him but could mean the world of difference for Fraser Brown.

   "It's conceivable that within his life there's going to be a significant step
forward in the treatment of cystic fibrosis. It will hopefully mean Fraser can
live a full life without facing the restrictions cystic fibrosis has placed on
me."

LOAD-DATE: December 1, 2006


                             316 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2006 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                              All Rights Reserved
                            The Independent (London)

                           November 30, 2006 Thursday
                                 First Edition

SECTION: HOME; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 239 words

HEADLINE: What is cystic fibrosis?

BYLINE: GENEVI??VE ROBERTS

BODY:

   Cystic fibrosis is an inherited, chronic condition that mainly affects the
lungs and digestive system. It affects around one in 2,500 children, and reduces
life expectancy.

   In the 1950s, people with CF usually died before school-leaving age, but now
they can expect to live into their late thirties and forties, although this
depends on the severity of the condition.

   A defective gene, on chromosome 7 of the 22 pairs of chromosomes in each
cell, causes the body to produce unusually sticky, thick mucus. This clogs the
lungs and half of CF sufferers have repeated chest infections and pneumonia. The
mucus also obstructs the pancreas, stopping enzymes processing food.

   More than 80 per cent of sufferers are diagnosed before they are three.
Symptoms include a lack of weight gain despite a good appetite as enzymes that
break down fat for absorbtion are blocked by mucus, persistent coughing and lung
infections.

   To help digestion, many sufferers take capsules of the missing pancreatic
enzymes. Many also need daily chest physiotherapy: vigorous massage to help
loosen the sticky mucus in the lungs. Parents are taught how to do this with
babies, while older children and adults can massage themselves. Any chest
infection must be treated quickly with antibiotics, and many CF sufferers are
routinely vaccinated against flu and pneumococcus.

   Though there is no cure, research is underway to find a cure for CF lung
disease with gene therapy.

LOAD-DATE: November 30, 2006


                             328 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2006 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                              All Rights Reserved
                            The Independent (London)

                           October 4, 2006 Wednesday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 42

LENGTH: 999 words

HEADLINE: Tata Steel 'hammering out a Corus takeover';
SHARES AND MARKETS MARKET REPORT

BYLINE: By Andrew Dewson

BODY:

   Although shares in Corus Group, the Anglo-Dutch steel producer, closed 1.5p
lower at 392.25p yesterday, yet another takeover story was doing the rounds
among traders late in the session.

   The lack of positive movement in the share price could be an indication that
there has been so much takeover talk in the steel sector since Mittal Steel
first bid for Arcelor in March that the market has some rumour fatigue.

   However, volume was strong with 35 million shares changing hands and the talk
is that Tata Steel, a subsidiary of Tata Group, India's largest privately owned
company with 2005-2006 revenues of $21.6bn, is already deep in discussions with
Corus senior management. The word is that an offer worth 580p per share, valuing
Corus at almost pounds 5.5bn, could be on the way before the end of this week.

   Strong interim results from the supermarket giant Tesco gave the whole food
retail sector a boost, following on from strong results from large European
rivals last month. Morrison Supermarkets added 4.25p to close at 247p, a
26-month high, while J Sainsbury firmed a penny and a half to 378.5p.

   Meanwhile, Merrill Lynch and Dresdner Kleinwort published bullish notes on
Tesco, sending the shares 7.75p better to 373.5p on the back of its fil.lbn
record first half pre-tax profits.

   In the broader market, weak mining and oil sectors, combined with further
selling in the online gambling sector, pushed London shares lower after another
session of weak volumes as the FTSE 100 index closed 20.7 weaker at 5937.1.
Commodity stocks accounted for eight of the top ten fallers in the blue chip
index, with index heavyweight BP falling 14p to 568.5p as the French broker
SocGen downgraded its recommendation to "sell". Shell was also out of favour,
dropping 22p to 1,781p. Cairn Energy lost 46p to close at l,836p.

   Just when some brokers were saying that CSR, the microchip group, was looking
oversold, along came the US investment bank Lehman Brothers with a substantial
downgrade and a reduction in its target price from l,200p to 800p, sending the
shares 59p worse to 755p. Wolfson Microelectronics, which until recently has
performed almost as a mirror image of CSR, was also out of favour with
investors, shedding 18.75p to close at 432p.

   AWG, the water utility group, succumbed to a bout of profit taking, falling
15p to close at l,605p, still well ahead of the l,555p offered by a consortium
led by private equity group 3i. However, Citigroup believes that a counter offer
is unlikely because most of 3i's partners in the deal are pension funds with
lower return requirements than other potential bidders, meaning any potential
counter bidders are likely to push the valuation too high.

   Pennon Group also gave back some of Monday's gains, shedding 3.75p to 523p
although most of the water sector held up against the falling market.

   Rank Group, the bingo, restaurant and gaming group, came under pressure as
the US investment bank Morgan Stanley placed a line of 17 million shares in the
market at 230p, 6.5p lower than Monday's closing price.

   Although the seller was not identified and the placing completed without too
much difficulty, there was some speculation among traders that the proposed sale
of the Hard Rock Cafe chain, on the cards since July, is not progressing well.
The shares closed 5p worse at231.5p.

   A late surge in buying in-terest pushed Northgate Information Solutions 8p
firmer to 88p by the close, fuelled by rumours that a private equity group is
poised to make an offer for the company.

   If an offer is to come, it would cap a remarkable 12 months for the software
group - it reported a 95 per cent jump in full year earnings in July, less than
a year after its head office burned down in the Buncefield oil depot fire.

   The six-month deadline for AIM cash shells to implement their strategies, do
a deal or face cancellation passed yesterday and as a result AIM is now 30
companies lighter.

   Azure Holdings and Infinity Bio-Energy both made the cut with last-minute
deals: gene therapeutics group ValiRx reversed into Azure in a deal worth pounds
12.7m, sending the shares 0.6p better to 1.45p, top of the small cap
leaderboard, while Infinity completed the acquisition of Brazilian sugar and
ethanol producer Coopernavi. Infinity closed the session unchanged at 5.55p
after trading resumed.

   Main movers

   Xstrata 2,246p (up 48p, 2.2 per cent) Rights issue smaller than feared.

   Kingfisher 252p (up 4.25p, 1.7 per cent) Buoyed by Tesco results. ?

   Brambles Industries 483.5p (up 7.5p, 1.6 per cent) Vague bid talk persists.

   NETeller 165p (up 25p, 17.9 percent) Rally after Monday's sector crash.

   GlaxoSmithKline 1457p (up 17p, 1.2 per cent) Anticoagulant Arixtra granted
FDA priority review.

   Ultra Electronics 1085p (up 40p, 3.8 per cent) Possible target for Boeing.

   Shanks Group 191.25p (up 5.75p, 3.1 per cent) ABN Amro says "buy"' 205p price
target.

   Misys 189p(up4p, 2.2 per cent) UBS ups to "buy" despite Monday's warning.

   Cobham186.25p (up 3.75p, 2.1 per cent) Aerospace industry consolidation
hopes.

   Adamind 28p (up 6p, 27.3 per cent) Receives unsolicited cash offer.

   Oxus Gold 22.75p (up 4p, 21.3 per cent) Has robust defence against Eurogold
suit, say traders.

   Walker Greenbank 33.75p (up 3.75p, 12.5 per cent) Strong first half.

   PartyGaming 40.75p (down 4.25p, 9.4 per cent) Cancels dividend in light of
new US legislation.

   Lonmin 2489p (down 115p, 4.4 per cent) Metal futures prices weaken.

   Man Group 440p (down 5.25p, 1.2 per cent) Citigroup downgrades to "hold" from
"buy".

   Randgold 1046p (down 68p, 6.1 per cent) In line with mining sector.

   Carphone Warehouse 310.5p (down 11.5p, 3.6 per cent) Investec trims forecasts
by 7 per cent.

   Daniel Stewart 14.75p (down 1.25p, 7.8 per cent) Warns on first half losses.

   Biocompatibles 137.75p (down 57p, 29.3 per cent) Abbott Labs decide not to
commercialise stents.

   Charteris 14.75 (down 1.25p, 7.8 per cent) Warns on full year revenues.

   For continually updated streaming prices of the Indy 100 and other indexes
visit www.independent.co.uk/Indy100

LOAD-DATE: October 4, 2006


                             335 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2006 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                              All Rights Reserved
                            The Independent (London)

                          September 6, 2006 Wednesday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 1671 words

HEADLINE: Science&Technology: Gene genius;
Scientists claim they are closing in on the holy grail - a therapy that could
cure Aids and cancer. So how real is this new medical dawn?

BYLINE: By Steve Connor

BODY:

   Each of these "short-interfering" strands of RNA can be targeted to work
against a particular gene, which is one of the reasons why the technique is so
attractive. There is less chance of cross-reactions or unintended side effects.
However, one of the biggest problems with RNAi is "delivery": how do you make
sure that the synthetic RNA molecules get inside the cells that matter?

   Professor Beverly Davidson of the University of Iowa is using a specially
adapted virus to do the job. She is developing a technique of "infecting"
certain parts of the brain with an "adeno-associated" virus. This is genetically
modified to carry RNAi molecules into the brain. These are targeted to silence
the mutated gene responsible for Huntington's disease - an inherited condition
that leads to an appalling degeneration of the brain.

   Huntington's disease is a good target for RNAi therapy because it is a
"dominant" genetic disorder - just one copy of the defective gene results in the
disease. Conventional gene therapy, which attempts to add a healthy version of a
gene that is missing or defective, would not work for Huntington's. In dominant
genetic diseases it is necessary to stop the mutant version of the gene from
working.

   Professor Davidson's group is instead targeting the defective copy of the
gene, leaving the healthy version unaffected, so permitting it to carry out its
normal duties. Tests on a mouse model of Huntington's have been successful.
Treated animals did not develop symptoms of the disease, whereas untreated mice
went on to suffer. Nor did the treated mice suffer any apparent ill effects,
leading some commentators to say that it was arguably one of the most promising
therapies for this crippling disease.

   "This is the first example of targeting gene silencing of a disease gene in
the brains of live animals and it suggests that this approach may eventually be
useful for human therapies," Professor Davidson said when the results were
announced.

   Today, Professor Davidson remains cautiously optimistic, aware that hype is
not in the best interests of patients and their families. "RNAi is extremely
exciting," she says. "Scientists are continuing to unravel how it works and
investigations are finding uses for RNA. Therapeutic use of RNAi has much
potential, but like everything, there will be hurdles to discover, and to find a
way over or around," she says.

   A range of infectious diseases caused by viruses are also being studied with
a view to being treated with some kind of RNAi therapy. Alnylam Pharmaceuticals
has, for instance, applied for a drug licence to start clinical trials of its
proprietary product for the treatment of respiratory syncytial virus, a major
cause of breathing illnesses in young children, the elderly and immune-deficient
patients.

   The Alnylam drug is designed to silence a gene that is essential for the
virus's replication. Tests on animals, where the drug was administered as a
nasal spray, have shown that it can prevent infection with the virus without any
toxic side-effects, the company says. The hope is that it could prevent
infection with a virus that is known to increase the risk of children developing
asthma in later life.

   Alnylam is also experimenting with a way of reducing blood cholesterol levels
using RNAi, which paradoxically was attached to cholesterol molecules as a way
of delivering it. The RNAi was targeted to silence apolipoprotein B, a regulator
of cholesterol metabolism. The company admitted that it was an experiment that
seemed unlikely, but tests on mice showed that it worked and now the firm wants
to try it out on people.

   John Rossi of the City of Hope Beckman Research Institute in Duarte,
California, says that this study showed that it may be possible to treat people
systemically with RNAi. "This is the first published demonstration that you can
systemically inject RNA and have them taken up by cells in several different
tissues," Professor Rossi says. The delivery technique that he is working on
relies on taking blood stem cells from the bone marrow of an Aids patient,
infecting these cells with RNAi molecules targeted against a vital gene used by
the Aids virus, and then reinjecting these cells back into the patient. The hope
is that the cells will develop into mature immune cells that produce RNAi
molecules that prevent HIV replication.

   "Our HIV trial is well on its way to initiating this year," Professor Rossi
says. One of the issues he has had to address, however, is how to make sure that
the virus he uses to infect the patient's cells with RNAi molecules is itself
safe. He intends to apply for a clinical trials licence this year. In Britain,
scientists are also excited about RNAi. Jo Milner, a cancer researcher at York
University, is developing the technique to silence the genes that are implicated
in triggering colon cancer, with some success in test-tube studies. "It is by
far one of the most exciting discoveries in biology," Dr Milner says. "It is a
natural process and has opened our minds to a whole new dimension of molecular
and cellular biology."

   Imagine a treatment for cancer, a cure for infectious diseases such as Aids,
or maybe an effective therapy for blindness or a lethal brain disease. Now
imagine that one breakthrough is responsible for all this medical hope.

   The breakthrough is RNA interference (RNAi), which some scientists believe
could be the biggest advance in healthcare since the development of antibiotics.
There is barely an area of medicine that may not be touched by future advances
in RNAi-a technique for switching off genes selectively and precisely.

   RNAi was only formally recognised in 1998 but over the past few years it has
emerged as one of the hottest developments in the field of medical science. Yet
another international conference on RNAi (titled RNAi Europe) is planned at the
end of September in Prague.

   The sheer range of illnesses and disorders that RNAi might address is
unprecedented. RNAi promises to become a radically new form of treatment for an
entire spectrum of illnesses, whether they result from an infectious attack from
the outside environment or an inner malfunction of the body's vital genes.

   In 2002, the journal Science voted RNAi its top breakthrough of the year and
biotechnology companies are pumping millions into its development. But sceptics
have warned that medical science is littered with false dawns. RNAi, they warn,
might fails the ultimate clinical tests of safety and efficacy.

   RNA stands for ribonucleic acid, the less well known cousin of
deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA), the molecule of inheritance. RNAi works by
interfering with the normal activity of genes. Scientists - to their amazement -
discovered that short molecules of RNA can block or "silence" the activity of a
particular gene, working like the dimmer switch of an electric light. RNAi
lowers or halts the production of the proteins produced from the genes on the
DNA of a chromosome. Scientists were surprised to discover that RNAi seems to be
a universal mechanism used by all living organisms for controlling gene
activity.

   Everything from petunia plants and fungi to fruit flies, nematode worms and
mice use RNAi to switch off their genes. Four years ago, scientists found that
human cells also use RNAi. It may have evolved as a protection against viruses
by targeting and switching off vital viral genes - a sort of micro immune
system.

   Discovering that RNAi works inside human cells led to the idea of exploiting
the phenomenon therapeutically. Could potentially harmful genes - either the
body's own mutations or viral invaders - be switched off using RNAi itself? If
so, virologists could design a new type of anti-viral drug that cripples the
ability of an infectious agent to attack human cells. Cancer specialists could
develop RNAi as a therapy to switch off the genes of a cancer cell, forcing it
to commit suicide while leaving healthy, cells unaffected. Meanwhile,
geneticists believed they might be able to rid the body of the harmful mutations
behind many inherited disorders.

   Many scientists were ecstatic about the prospect for treating human diseases.
"The broader science of RNAi is spectacular," Professor Phillip Sharp, a Nobel
laureate at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, said in 2003.

   Three years later, Professor Sharp remains in ebullient mood. "The advances
in the field have exceeded expectations," he says.

   The most advanced clinical trials of RNAi are being carried out in America by
two biotechnology companies, Acuity and Sirna. Both involve patients suffering
from macular degeneration, when the abnormal growth of blood vessels in the eye
causes visual impairment and, eventually, blindness.

   Both companies have developed RNAi therapies that target the human gene that
makes a protein called vascular endothelial growth factor. This growth factor
stimulates the growth of the blood vessels that cause the disorder. The aim of
the RNAi therapy is to silence this gene, curbing the further invasion of blood
vessels.

   Scientists believe that macular degeneration is a good disorder to test RNAi
because the eye is a relatively closed system easily treated with direct
injections. Acuity has already completed phase I clinical trials, which test for
toxicity and general tolerance, and is preparing for larger, phase-II clinical
trials.

   A spokesman for Acuity said that results of the phase-II trial are expected
soon. But it is only after the much larger phase-III clinical trials - involving
hundreds or possibly thousands of patients - that doctors will be able to say
whether RNAi is any good for macular degeneration.

   One of the beauties of the RNAi approach is that it is comparatively easy for
scientists to make RNAi drugs. Effectively they are just small strands of the
RNA molecule, which can be synthesised by machine. Each strand is about 22 units
long - tiny compared with the 3 billion units that make up the entire DNA
molecule of the human genome.

   The sheer range of disorders and illnesses that RNAi might treat is
unprecedented

GRAPHIC: How 'The Independent' broke the story of RNAi on 10 August 2002' Shape
of hope? A strand of RNA SCIENCE PHOTO LIBRARY

LOAD-DATE: September 6, 2006


                             355 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2006 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                              All Rights Reserved
                            The Independent (London)

                             July 11, 2006 Tuesday
                                 First Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 29

LENGTH: 1130 words

HEADLINE: Beware the allure of 'liberal eugenics'

BYLINE: DOMINIC LAWSON

BODY:

   One of the glories of The Independent is that its opinion pages play host to
wildly different views, with regular columnists often diametrically opposed. The
readers are expected, as educated grown-ups, to be able to cope with such
ideological dissonance.

   It is in that spirit that I take issue with Johann Hari's article last week,
in which he celebrated "liberal eugenics", and argued that any who wanted to
stand in the way "should be shunned and shamed". That's an awful lot of shunning
and shaming, starting with the world's 900 million practising Catholics.

   I am, as it happens, not among their number, and therefore am not horrified
by the fact that 62-year-old Patti Farrant has just given birth to a baby boy,
by means of IVF and a donated egg. The argument that somehow the child is the
victim of a selfish act, because he faces bereavement at an early age, is not an
entirely compelling one. My own mother died when I was in my twenties, and while
that made me very sad - and still does - I didn't and don't conclude that I
would have been better off never having existed.

   But Mrs Farrant's actions seem to me a long way from a world in which parents
could choose which genetic attributes they would like their children to have -
or not to have - and perform the relevant additions or subtractions in a Petri
dish before implanting the genetically modified embryo in the mother's womb.
Part of the essence of our humanity is that, while subject to the random mixing
of our parents' genes, we feel we are the masters of our own destiny,
responsible entirely for our own actions and with the vital sense of freedom
that entails.

   Imagine, as an adolescent, discovering that your well-meaning and apparently
beneficent parents had paid for pre-implantation gene therapy which had made you
exceptionally gifted at mathematics. The direction of your education had
inexorably followed. But what if you wished you had been of a more intuitive and
artistic bent, and you found the company of other mathematicians deeply
depressing? The sense of helplessness would be appalling, and the hatred you
would feel for your parents would be intense, going far beyond the adolescent
rebelliousness of pre-modified teenagers.

   Johann dismisses the concerns of those who fear that the world could divide
"between the rich, with their genetically modified babies and the poor, who are
lumbered with the random flaws of nature". Apparently the answer is to make all
such genetic modification freely available on the NHS - as if that benighted
organisation did not have enough on its clinical plate. As the example above
indicates, I believe that the victims of such a class division would not just be
the poor, but the genetically modified rich kids whose sense of individual worth
and achievement would be even more than usually depleted by parents with more
money than sense.

   Genetic modification, like all science, is neither good nor bad in itself. I
believe that GM crops contain more potential for improving the lot of the
poorest among humanity than almost any other scientific advance of the past
century. It is precisely because a plant is not a thinking being with a
fundamental need to be conscious of his or her absolute and un intermediated
individuality that I don't denigrate the efforts of scientists to create crops
genetically immune to disease.

   Johann insists that "liberal eugenics has nothing to do with the evil of Nazi
eugenics, which was imposed by the state and concerned not with producing
healthier babies but with deranged race theories. No, this new brand is
voluntarily entered into by parents and is motivated by love, not hate". There
are some misconceptions here.

   First of all, the Nazis were absolutely concerned with producing healthier
babies, which is why they embarked on the compulsory sterilisation of the
handicapped. They shared the "liberal eugenicist" view that to have a disability
makes a life less worth living, and that it was therefore morally justified to
prevent as many of those lives as possible, and to supplant them with the
maximum number of "healthy babies".

   Second, I recall that Johann supported the action of an unnamed NHS trust,
which in March sought - against the parents' wishes - to end the life of child
MB, who suffered from the most severe form of Spinal Muscular Atrophy. Judge
James Hol-man turned down the NHS's application, and as far as we know, MB is
still alive. Here we had as clear an example as you could wish of the state
attempting to impose a "solution" which was unacceptable to "parents motivated
by love". In what sense was liberal eugenics in this case distinguishable from
illiberal eugenics?

   Finally, "liberal eugenics" is not a "new brand." It is the original brand.
As the German philosopher JYrgen Habermas has pointed out: "What seems to be
reviving today is the explosive alliance of Darwinism and free-market ideology
which flourished at the turn of 20th century under the umbrella of the Pax
Britannica." Perhaps Habermas was thinking of Winston Churchill, who as a member
of Asquith's Liberal cabinet in 1910, told his leader that "the unnatural growth
of the feebleminded and insane classes is a national and race danger which it is
impossible to exaggerate. The source from which this stain of madness is fed
should be cut off and sealed up before another year has passed." Churchill was
influenced by English liberals such as Galton, who can plausibly be described as
the father of eugenics.

   Another great English "progressive" eugenicist was the birth control pioneer
Marie Stopes. She cut her son Harry out of her will for marrying a short-sighted
woman called Mary Barnes Wallis. Stopes wrote: "She has an inherited disease of
the eyes which not only makes her wear hideous glasses so that it is horrid to
look at her, but the awful curse will carry on and I have the horror of our line
being so contaminated and little children with the misery of glasses ... Mary
and Harry are quite callous about both the wrong to their children, the wrong to
my family and the eugenic crime."

   Of course it is ludicrous to label every eugenicist as a Nazi. But it's worth
listening to those who had actual experience of the Hitler years. One such was
the late German President Johannes Rau, who as a precocious schoolboy was a
member of the "Confessing Church", the small group within German Protestantism
which resisted Nazism. Shortly before his death this year, Rau said this about
the risks inherent in "liberal eugenics": "Once you start to instrumentalise
human life, once you start to distinguish between life worth living and life not
worth living, you enter upon a course where there is no stopping point."

   Marie Stopes cut her son out of her will for marrying a short-sighted woman

   d.lawson@independent.co.uk

LOAD-DATE: July 11, 2006


                             356 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2006 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                              All Rights Reserved
                            The Independent (London)

                             July 5, 2006 Wednesday
                                 First Edition

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 1898 words

HEADLINE: 10 BRITONS WHO SHAPED OUR WORLD;
A celebration of science in the UK Today, the nation's universities are saluting
the pioneers whose research has resulted in global change. Simon Hadlington
looks at some of the most inspiring examples

BYLINE: Simon Hadlington

BODY:

   Alf Adams

   Eureka moment: The discovery of the strained quantum-well laser.

   How has it changed our lives? The strained quantum-well laser lies at the
heart of most technologies that require the transfer of digital information,
from the most basic CD player to the complex fibre optic systems that keep the
internet functioning across the world. Everyone reading this newspaper will
today have had some contact -directly or indirectly - with a strained
quantum-well laser. Semiconductor lasers receive electrical signals and turn
them into pulses of light, called photons. In a quantum-well laser, there is an
extremely thin layer of semiconducting crystals in which the laser light is
generated. In his laboratory at the University of Surrey, Adams discovered that
if the crystal lattice of this layer was grown in such a way to place it under
strain the lattice would lose its symmetry. This distortion of the crystalline
lattice produces photons much more efficiently - allowing far more information
to be carried by the light energy.

   What next? Adams is Distinguished Professor of Physics at Surrey and
maintains a strong research interest in optoelectronics.

   Fred Sanger

   Eureka moment: Developing a way of determining the chemical structure of
proteins, and of "reading" DNA sequences.

   How has it changed our lives? Sanger has been described as the father of
genomics. He invented a way of finding out the sequence of the building blocks -
called "base pairs" - of DNA. This pioneering work laid the foundation for the
sequencing of large and more complex genomes, culminating in the human genome.
Sanger also discovered a way to work out the chemical structure of proteins, and
revealed the amino acid sequence of insulin, enabling it to be manufactured.
Sanger is one of only four people to be awarded two Nobel Prizes - in 1958 for
sequencing proteins, and in 1980 for sequencing DNA.

   What next? Sanger is now retired, but the Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute in
Cambridge is one of the leading centres in the world for genomic research.

   Martin Sweeting

   Eureka moment: Building a small, low-cost satellite as part of his PhD
project which was successfully placed in Earth's orbit and transmitted signals
back to the base station at Surrey University.

   How has it changed our lives? Satellites are becoming increasingly important
for monitoring the state of the Earth, for telecommunications and for
navigation. Conventionally, satellites have been big, bulky, and expensive to
build and launch, which put them beyond the reach of many organisations that
would benefit from them - aid agencies monitoring disaster areas, for example.
Sweeting showed that satellites can be made small, compact and at low cost by
taking advantage of the development of smaller and more robust electronics.
Following his early research, Sweeting founded the company Surrey Satellite
Technology Ltd.

   What next? Sweeting was knighted in 2002 in recognition of his pioneering
work. Among his company's latest developments is a "constellation" of five small
satellites, which allows daily monitoring of a given location. The system is
currently being used to detect illegal logging activities in South America.

   Deborah Withington

   Eureka moment: Realising that "directional sound", which can be pinpointed
instantly by the listener, could have safety uses.

   How has it changed our lives? Withington, a professor at the University of
Leeds, was sitting in a car trying to locate an emergency vehicle from the noise
of its siren when it struck her how useful it would be if people could pinpoint
immediately the source of such sounds. She decided to develope a system to help
people evacuate buildings in an emergency and, because she was told she would
not get funding from the research councils due to the potentially commercial
nature of her idea, she set up a company to develop and market the technology.
The company has also created a siren system for emergency vehicles that allows
motorists to locate the vehicle quickly and allow it to pass.

   What next? Withington's team is currently developing a new cane for blind
people that emits an ultrasonic beam.

   Ian Wilmut

   Eureka moment: Taking the nucleus from an adult cell and transplanting it
into an egg cell, which in turn was inserted into the uterus to conceive Dolly
the sheep, the first clone using a method of "cell nuclear replacement".

   How has it changed our lives? Almost all biologists previously believed that
the cells in our bodies had fixed roles. The conception in 1997 of Dolly -named
after Dolly Parton - from the mammary gland cell of a sheep forced biological
science to reconsider the functional possibilities of cells. Researchers began
investigating the possibility that cell nuclear replacement might be able to
change very precisely the functioning of any gene in an animal. It also opened
up the possibility that, in human cloning, babies could be created without
debilitating conditions. Scientists have since been attempting to "wash" egg
cells that are affected by motor neurone and Huntington's disease. Cloning also
promised much for the future of medicine and agriculture. Herds of cloned
animals could potentially be designed to produce insulin in milk, and be made
immune to diseases such as BSE and C JD. Part of the enormous impact that Dolly
the sheep's brief life had on society, was that it brought to the fore once more
the ethical debate on cloning and embryology.

   What next? In 1999, Wilmut received an OBE and in 2000 he was elected a
Fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh for his work in embryology. He has also
won a fellowship in the Academy of Medical Sciences. However, Wilmut's role in
the Dolly project has become a matter of controversy. He had to testify at a
court in Edinburgh earlier this year where he gave himself less than a third of
the credit for Dolly's creation. Wilmut believes that in the future we will be
able to change the functioning of cells without having to use a hollowed-out
donor egg, which would permit the tackling of genetic defects without the
ethical complications.

   Helen Muir

   Eureka moment: Emergency procedures in aircraft

   How has it changed our lives? Muir's research at Cranfield University has
helped aircraft designers and operators to improve safety procedures by
assessing how survivors of aircraft accidents react. Her research team was the
first to reproduce real human behaviour in an emergency. Researchers used a
large simulator of a smoke-filled aircraft cabin and, to get an accurate
representation of the panic that occurs during an emergency, volunteers were
offered pounds 5 if they got out of the aircraft first. In this way Muir could
pinpoint weaknesses in evacuation procedures and the design of the aircraft. She
discovered, for example, that extra space is needed next to the aeroplane exits,
and this finding has been incorporated into planes around the world.

   What next? Muir, head of the department of human factors at Cranfield, still
works in the field of passenger safety - including trains as well as planes.

   Martin Evans

   Eureka moment: The discovery of embryonic stem cells.

   How has it changed our lives? Many medical scientists believe stem cells hold
the key to treating a range of illnesses, from Parkinson's disease to diabetes.
Stem cells are "undifferentiated" - they have not yet become a heart cell or a
liver cell, for example - but retain the ability to do so. The type of stem cell
considered to have most potential are those derived from embryos. Evans, then a
researcher at the University of Cambridge, discovered embryonic stem cells in
mice in 1981. He was the first person to demonstrate the use of gene therapy to
cure the deficit in cystic fibrosis in a whole animal. Researchers across the
world are now building on Evans's work, trying to understand how to turn human
embryonic stem cells into specific cell types in a bid to find new ways of
repairing tissues or organs.

   What next? Evans, now director of the School of Biosciences at Cardiff
University, continues to give important insights into the function of genes. He
was knighted in 2004.

   Peter Fleming

   Eureka moment: Discovering that the numb of cot deaths co be cut by following
a few simple procedures.

   How has it changed our lives? Twenty years ago in the UK, 2,000 babies a year
died every year for no apparent reason in their sleep. Fleming and colleagues at
the University of Bristol carried out a survey in the Avon area to try to
discover if there were any discernible risk factors relating to cot death. After
analysing the data Fleming pinpointed three potential factors: babies sleeping
on their front, being wrapped in too many blankets, and being exposed to
cigarette smoke. These results were published in 1989, and during the next two
years in the Avon area a public health campaign was launched. By the middle of
1991 cot-death rates had been cut by more than two-thirds. Backed by TV
presenter Anne Diamond, Fleming persuaded an initially sceptical and reluctant
Department of Health to launch the "Back to Sleep" campaign nationwide. Very
soon, a similar reduction in rates of cot death was achieved nationally.

   What next? Fleming has been a member of Baroness Kennedy's committee which
examines how agencies such as the police and social services react to unexpected
deaths of babies.

   George Gray

   Eureka moment: Creating the first stable liquid crystals suitable for
liquid-crystal displays.

   How has it changed our lives? Liquid crystal displays (LCDs) are used in
everything from pocket calculators and watches to mobile phones and laptop
computers. Scientists had been aware of the potential for using liquid crystals
in displays for many years, but the materials that were available were
insufficiently stable at room temperature, and could be destroyed when exposed
to moisture, air or light. Working with the Ministry of Defence in 1973, Gray
and his colleagues at the University of Hull discovered a new class of liquid
crystalline material which was stable at room temperature. This was seized upon
by the electronics industry and consumer products that contained small LCDs,
such as watches and calculators, rapidly became ubiquitous. Liquid crystal
technology now forms the basis of an industry estimated to be worth some pounds
20 billion worldwide.

   What next? Gray is now retired from the University of Hull but continues to
play an active role in liquid crystals matters around the world.

   Peter Mansfield

   Eureka moment: Performed the first MRI scan of a having human body part - his
own finger.

   How has it changed our lives? More than 60 million RI scans are carried out
each year around the World. MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) is a technique for
visualising the inside of living organisms. It can detect cancer, for example,
without the need for surgery. It works by subjecting the body to a magnetic
field and radio waves, which cause the nucleii of hydrogen atoms, contained
within water in the blood and soft tissues of the body, to emit a tiny radio
signal. Mansfield's pioneering work at the University of Nottingham produced a
way mathematically to decipher the signals produced by the scanner very quickly,
enabling three-dimensional images of structures within the body to be created.

   What next? Mansfield was knighted in 1993 and awarded the Nobel Prize for
Medicine in 2003 for his work on developing the concept of MRI. He is an
emeritus professor at Nottingham.

LOAD-DATE: July 5, 2006


                             371 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2006 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                              All Rights Reserved
                            The Independent (London)

                              April 3, 2006 Monday
                                 First Edition

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 610 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy fixes 'incurable' disorder of the immune system

BYLINE: By Steve Connor Science Editor

BODY:

   Gene therapy has successfully repaired the immune systems of two men who were
born with an "incurable" genetic disorder that rendered them almost defenceless
against bacterial and fungal infections.

   Sixteen months after an operation to repair a defective gene, which each man
had inherited from his mother, the once severely ill patients show signs of
complete recovery.

   The latest success with gene therapy will lead to further operations to treat
many other chronic and incurable conditions resulting from the inheritance of
defective genes, scientists believe.

   Gene therapy involves the alteration of a person's genome to repair or
replace a mutated gene. After many years of hype and hope, the technique seems
finally to have proven its potential with a handful of successful operations.

   The latest success was achieved by doctors in Germany, Switzerland and
Britain who treated two men with chronic granulomatous disorder (CGD), an
immunodeficiency disease caused by a defective gene on the maternally inherited
X chromosome.

   The men - both in their mid-twenties - suffered repeated life-threatening
infections from bacteria and fungi and from an early age had to rely on powerful
antibiotics and antifungal medicines. Since their operations 16 months ago at
the University Hospital in Frankfurt, both patients have gained weight and have
been free of the severe infections that have plagued them since childhood.

   Manual Grez of the Institute for Biomedical Research in Frankfurt, one of the
leaders of the study published in the journal Nature Medicine, said the results
suggest that it may be possible to use gene therapy to treat other similar
inherited diseases.

   "This a landmark study for chronic granulomatous disorder and the potential
of gene therapy. These are very positive results but there is still a lot of
work needed to make this technology available to all CGD patients," Dr Grez
said.

   CGD is rare, affecting about 1 in 250,000 people in Britain, and is caused by
defects in a type of white blood cell known as phagocytes, which normally engulf
and destroy harmful microbes as they invade the body.

   About 60 per cent of CGD sufferers inherit a defective copy of the gp91phox
gene which leaves their bone marrow unable to manufacture phagocytes with the
right chemical machinery for destroying the microbes.

   To repair the problem, the doctors removed stem cells from the patients' bone
marrow, inserted a healthy copy of the gp91phox gene into the cells while
culturing them in the laboratory, and then reinserted the engineered cells into
the patients' bone marrow.

   To increase the chances of the genetically altered stem cells repopulating
the bone marrow, the doctors partially destroyed the patients' own bone marrow
with a powerful chemotherapy agent designed to rid the body of as many defective
phagocytes as possible.

   Professor Adrian Thrasher of the Great Ormond Street Hospital in London, who
has performed similar gene therapy operations involving other cells of the
immune system, said British CGD patients could be next in line for gene therapy.
Further improvements and refinements in the technology are now under way to
maximise the effectiveness and safety of the system," he said. "This is a step
towards the definitive cure of CGD but there is still a lot of work to be done,"

   The work was carried out with the help of the CGD Research Trust charity
which has spent pounds 1.2m over the past eight years to promote gene therapy.
Liz Nelson, the trust's chief executive, said: "We believe that gene therapy may
eventually help many people with genetic disorders, and this early work must be
supported." Jeans for Genes helpline 0800 980 4800

LOAD-DATE: April 3, 2006


                             381 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2006 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                              All Rights Reserved
                            The Independent (London)

                           January 28, 2006 Saturday
                                 First Edition

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 388 words

HEADLINE: I'm 42 now and I wish I'd known the value of life when I was 18';
The 5-Minute Interview

BYLINE: Andy Rourke Musician, former bassist with the Smiths

BODY:

   Andy Rourke, 42, has organised tonight's Manchester vs Cancer concert at the
MEN Arena, featuring acts including New Order and Johnny Marr. Funds raised by
the concert will go the Christie Hospital.

   The idea for the concert came about...

   In October last year, when my manager Nova's sister and father were diagnosed
with cancer. After that happened he was devastated so I came up with the idea of
a benefit gig. It was only going to be in a little club, but as I went through
my phone book, I've got quite a list of Manchester musicians. Now it's at the
MEN. Arena so it's turned into a bit of a beast.

   The aim of the concert is...

   To raise money for gene therapy at Manchester's Christie Hospital as opposed
to chemotherapy, and to raise people's awareness because Manchester is the
cancer capital of the UK.

   At the concert I will be...

   Doing a Smiths' song with Johnny Marr and playing with Badly Drawn Boy.

   If I wasn't talking to you right now I'd be...

   En route to a Mick Rock photo session with a lot of other musicians.
Everyone's been invited

   A phrase I use far too often is...

   "Take it easy." That's what I always say at the end of a phone conversation.
It sounds really cheesy.

   I wish people would take more notice of...

   Their impending doom. To live their life to the full. I'm 42 now and I wish
I'd known the value of life when I was 18 or 19.

   The most surprising thing that ever happened to me was...

   Probably living this long. In my twenties I did a lot of bad stuff. I've
chilled out now.

   A common misperception of me is...

   That since leaving the Smiths I sit around watching telly. Me, Mani and Hook
have a band called Freebass - with three bass players - it's very Spinal Tap.

   The ideal night out is...

   A nice bottle of wine and some good food with my lady, Heather.

   I'm very bad at...

   Interviews.

   I'm not a politician but...

   I'd probably be in the Green Party [tackling] poverty in the Third World and
global warming.

   In moments of weakness I...

   Drink and chew my nails. I'm a bit of a wino.

   You know me as a pop musician, but in a truer life I'd have been...

   An art teacher. I always thought they were the coolest teachers.

   The best age to be is...

   I'm a firm believer in you're as old as the woman you feel. That makes me
about 23.

   In a nutshell, my philosophy is this:

   The quote from Spinal Tap: "Have a good time all the time."

   Elisa Bray

GRAPHIC: Andy Rourke: 'In my twenties, I did a lot of bad stuff'

LOAD-DATE: January 28, 2006


                             383 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2005 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                              All Rights Reserved
                            The Independent (London)

                           December 29, 2005 Thursday
                                 First Edition

SECTION: COMMENT; Pg. 31

LENGTH: 1123 words

HEADLINE: The hype over stem cells has gone too far

BYLINE: MARY DEJEVSKY

BODY:

   The disgrace of Professor Hwang Woo-suk will go down in the annals as one of
the great scientific reversals of our time. Professor Hwang, of South Korea's
Seoul National University, resigned last week after much of his pioneering work
on cloning and stem cells was exposed as a sham. He offered a public apology for
the 'shock and disappointment' he had caused.

   'Shock' and 'disappointment' were especially well-chosen words for a context
that extends far beyond Korea. Professor Hwang's speciality is currently
lionised as one of the most promising fields of medical research " if not the
most promising of all. It draws the most capable and ambitious young scientists;
it attracts billions of dollars in funding; and it is sustained by a lavish
investment of popular hope. If wishful thinking alone were the driving force of
medical science, stem cells would have been produced from cloned embryos,
injected into humans and be curing all manner of dread conditions already.

   Until it is established how much of Professor Hwang's research is
discredited, the field is effectively in suspension. Those who have cited the
professor's flawed results to support their own research will have to revisit
their conclusions. The flow of funding towards stem-cell research may slow.
These are dark and uncertain days for the burgeoning community of stem- cell
researchers.

   Yet it is high time that a long second look was taken at this whole area of
science. Researchers have talked up the potential benefits of stem cells to the
point where swaths of lay opinion now regard them as a panacea. So often have
they told us that they are the 'building blocks of life' or some such that we
have come to believe them.

   And how can we not? When relatives and friends are afflicted with conditions
that could, we are told, be cured so simply in future, what qualifications do we
non-scientists have for doubt?

   My own aversion to conventional wisdom may predispose me to be unduly
negative about the embrace of stem-cell technology as the cure-all of the
future. But it is a fact that cut-throat competition for funding encourages
research departments to advertise their prospects more optimistically than they
might have done in the past. Investors, not unreasonably, want the promise of
high returns before they risk an initial outlay. What might be all too easily
becomes what already is. The hype needs to be banished from stem-cell research;
Professor Hwang's public admission of mistakes may in this respect be a salutary
development for his discipline.

   But there is another reason, too, why the field of stem-cell research and
cloning so urgently needs this pause for reflection. And it has to do not with
the possibility of expensive failure, but with the distinctly ambiguous
implications of success.

   Stem-cell research has been very convincingly presented by its proponents as
being all about curing diseases that are at present incurable. And in part, of
course, it is. Who would begrudge treatment to children with defective immune
systems " its most successful application so far " or to those with diseases
such as multiple sclerosis or Parkinson's? There need be no real debate here.
The controversy in the US relates not to the treatment as such, but to the use
of aborted or cloned foetuses to produce the stem cells.

   The great hope of stem-cell research, however " and the precise area in which
Professor Hwang was working " is that it will be possible to grow and implant
cells that are genetically matched to individual patients. This would mean not
just that inherited diseases could be screened for in the womb, as in some cases
they are already, but that all manner of genetic 'faults' could be corrected.

   It is at this point that 'treatment' mutates all too easily into
'improvement' " and gene therapy, the term that is fast entering our vocabulary,
into a word that has been in ideological exile for half a century: 'eugenics'.

   What constitutes a genetic 'fault' may depend on culture or context. Is
genetic susceptibility to a disease detected in a foetus grounds for treatment
or abortion? And what price then health insurance? At present, insurers are not
permitted to require genetic testing, not even in the United States, where
private health insurance is the rule. But the pressure is there; it makes
commercial sense for the insurers and it will surely prove irresistible. The
result will be either large groups of people whose genetic make-up renders them
uninsurable or the end of private health insurance. Politicians will have to
choose.

   And what of supposedly desired characteristics? It is sufficient to scan a
few US fertility services on the internet to realise how far the exercise of
parental choice has already advanced. That one biological parent's high IQ,
sporty physique, blonde hair and blue eyes may not guarantee a child that is
precisely to specification is a separate issue. The scale of this society's
genetic preferences are all too apparent. Science increasingly makes it possible
for them to be realised. Sex selection is already being broached in this country
as a procedure that could become as routine as amniocentesis for testing the
health of the foetus. Could selection for other features follow?

   The implications do not stop at birth. If there is no censure attached to
selecting certain characteristics in children, what will be the lot of those
children who do not conform, whether by appearance or intellect? When society
regards it largely as the luck of the draw that people turn out as they do,
there must be a tolerance of difference. Once it becomes possible to select or
change any of these elements, tolerance is likely to decline. Individuals will
be held responsible for choosing or not choosing 'treatment'. This is not 1984
or Brave New World, it is basic and brutal common sense.

   Until now, the stem-cell pioneers and gene-therapy proponents have been
extraordinarily successful in ignoring all links between their research and the
early 20th century pursuit of eugenics. If you want to split hairs, you could
say that the quest then was to improve the human race, whereas now it is to
improve each individual, one by one. But the implications are surely the same:
the exclusion, demonising or destruction of those who do not, or cannot be made
to, fit.

   The 60-year taboo that banished eugenics from our vocabulary may also have
expunged the knowledge of what it led to when it became part of a national ethos
of supremacy. Perhaps that taboo was too complete. If the disgrace of a South
Korean professor makes us all " scientists and non- scientists alike " stop and
think, his overzealous pursuit of scientific glory will have had a welcome and
salutary effect.

   m.dejevsky@independent.co.uk

LOAD-DATE: December 29, 2005


                             403 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2005 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            August 19, 2005, Friday

SECTION: First Edition; BUSINESS; Pg. 53

LENGTH: 71 words

HEADLINE: OUTLOOK: HEDGE FUNDS AND SHIRE'S US TAKEOVER

BYLINE: JEREMY WARNER

BODY:


    In a comment on hedge funds yesterday, I said Shire Pharmaceuticals might
withdraw its bid for Transkaryotic Therapies if hedge funds succeed in court
action to force an increase in the price. In fact the bid is already
unconditional, and Shire cannot now withdraw. If hedge funds succeed, Shire
would have no option but to pay the extra. Apologies for any misunderstanding
caused.

    j.warner@independent.co.uk

LOAD-DATE: August 19, 2005


                             404 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2005 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                           August 18, 2005, Thursday

SECTION: First Edition; BUSINESS; Pg. 55

LENGTH: 204 words

HEADLINE: OUTLOOK: HEDGE FUNDS AS SHAREHOLDER ACTIVISTS

BYLINE: JEREMY WARNER

BODY:


    The traditional view of a hedge fund is as a professional 'short seller' of
stocks and shares. As the genre grows, however, they seem increasingly to be
long of them, and to the dismay of many managements, it is hard to find
shareholders as activist or as diligent in their approach to investment as a
hedge fund.

    It was a hedge fund which forced Deutsche Borse to abandon its bid for the
London Stock Exchange. Now they are threatening to derail Shire Pharmaceutical's
bid for the US biotech, Transkaryotic Therapies, by challenging the valuation in
a Delaware court. The idea is to force Shire to pay more. If they succeed, Shire
may instead withdraw altogether.

    Whatever the outcome, managements can expect many more of these frustrating
interventions. Even companies as large as Vodafone are unlikely to be immune in
the hunt for value extraction. Is this a good thing? To many chief executives,
it seems as if long-term vision is being sacrificed to the pursuit of short-term
gain. Yet like them or loathe them, activist hedge funds are the new reality,
and if their proposals for corporate change are reasonably founded, then
increasingly we can expect them to succeed.

    j.warner@independent.co.uk

LOAD-DATE: August 18, 2005


                             408 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2005 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            August 6, 2005, Saturday

SECTION: First Edition; BUSINESS; Pg. 46

LENGTH: 45 words

HEADLINE: ARK MAKES GENE BREAKTHROUGH

BODY:


    Finnish scientists working for Ark Therapeutics have developed a technique
that should make gene therapy safer, by ensuring inserted genes end up in the
right place, the UK biotech said yesterday. The company said it was seeking
patent protection for its discovery.

LOAD-DATE: August 6, 2005


                             414 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2005 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            July 28, 2005, Thursday

SECTION: First Edition; BUSINESS; Pg. 55

LENGTH: 397 words

HEADLINE: SHIRE BILL FOR TKT MIGHT RISE AS COURT BATTLE LOOMS

BYLINE: BY STEPHEN FOLEY

HIGHLIGHT:
Matthew Emmens: New drug development platform FT

BODY:


    Shire Pharmaceuticals faces the prospect of having to pay more for its
£900m-plus acquisition of a US biotech company after more than a third of
investors in Transkaryotic Therapies demanded a court review of the deal.

    TKT shareholders approved the deal by the slimmest of margins yesterday, but
Shire now faces a courtroom battle to prove its offer of $ 37 per share
represents a fair price.

    Investors holding 34.6 per cent of TKT shares " many of whom have bought in
above the level of the Shire offer " said they would demand their right to a
legal appraisal of the company's worth, a practice allowed under Delaware law.

    Shire insisted the deal would be completed today regardless, and it was not
clear whether all of the TKT rebels would in fact exercise their appraisal
rights. But the company was able to say only that it 'expects to pay'
approximately $ 1.6bn for TKT, and the prospect of protracted confusion over the
final cost of the controversial acquisition dismayed analysts.

    The TKT rebels included hedge funds and the veteran investor Carl Icahn.
Their cause was bolstered by the former TKT chief executive Michael Astrue, who
resigned in April rather than accept a deal he argued undervalued the company.

    The acquisition takes Shire into enzyme replacement therapies, drugs for
rare genetic conditions, which are targeted at small numbers of patients but can
command some of the highest prices for pharmaceuticals. Matthew Emmens, the
Shire chief executive, said: 'This acquisition brings a new drug development
platform and expertise within a specialty area, as well as further expansion
into the European markets.'

    Only 52.6 per cent of TKT shareholders backed the deal, which needed 50 per
cent in favour to pass. A little over a quarter voted against. Shire
shareholders voted overwhelmingly in favour; there was no sign of the early
objections to the deal which had sent Shire shares down 10 per cent in two days
in April.

    Shire shares rose 11p to 655p on news of the approvals, as investors had
feared TKT shareholders could reject the deal, forcing Shire to decide whether
to raise its offer for all shareholders or walk away. Now, it will not have to
make any payments to the TKT rebels until after the court case has been decided,
and only those who take the matter to court will receive any extra value
ascribed to TKT.

LOAD-DATE: July 28, 2005


                             420 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2005 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            July 13, 2005, Wednesday

SECTION: First Edition; BUSINESS; Pg. 58

LENGTH: 289 words

HEADLINE: SHIRE'S ACQUISITION TARGET WARNS OF FINANCIAL TROUBLES IF $ 1.6BN BID
IS TURNED DOWN

BYLINE: BY KATHERINE GRIFFITHS IN NEW YORK

BODY:


    The board of a Nasdaq-listed biotech company which is being pursued by the
UK's Shire Pharmaceuticals warned yesterday that if shareholders blocked the
deal, its financial situation would be significantly weakened.

    Transkaryotic Therapies (TKT) of the US has agreed to sell itself to Shire
for $ 1.6bn (£900m) but two shareholders are campaigning against the deal,
saying that it significantly undervalues TKT. The company claimed in a financial
filing that if the sale falls apart, it would have to raise extra money in the
market. It will also have to pay a break fee of $ 52m to Shire.

    Porter Orlin and Millenco, two New York-based investment companies and
shareholders in TKT, filed letters with the Securities and Exchange Commission
this month saying that a 27 July vote of Shire's acquisition of TKT should be
delayed to give shareholders more time to consider the deal.

    According to both shareholders, Shire is significantly underpaying for TKT,
a specialist in enzyme replacement drugs, which treat rare genetic diseases.
Shire is offering $ 37 a share for TKT. Porter Orlin and Millenco believe the
price should be between $ 45 and $ 55.

    The deal is important for Shire, which is trying to break into the
fast-growing biotech sector. TKT shares were down 3 cents to $ 37.10 in morning
Nasdaq trading.

    Separately, Shire's larger rival, GlaxoSmithKline, was waiting for the
outcome of a vote yesterday by US shareholders in another biotech, Corixa, which
it is trying to buy. Some of Corixa's shareholders have opposed the acquisition,
saying that GSK is paying too little.

    But the deal is expected to go through as the British company already owns
20 per cent of the biotech company's shares.

LOAD-DATE: July 13, 2005


                             422 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2005 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                             July 2, 2005, Saturday

SECTION: First Edition; BUSINESS; Pg. 42

LENGTH: 400 words

HEADLINE: US INVESTORS OPPOSED TO SHIRE'S $ 1.6BN BIOTECH DEAL

BYLINE: BY KATHERINE GRIFFITHS IN NEW YORK

BODY:


    Shire Pharmaceuticals' proposed $ 1.6bn (£903m) acquisition of a US biotech
came under fresh fire yesterday when two major shareholders in the Nasdaq-listed
company said the price was too low.

    Porter Orlin and Millenco, New York-based investment companies, filed
letters with the Securities and Exchange Commission saying a 27 July vote on
Shire's acquisition of Transkaryotic Therapies (TKT) should be delayed to give
shareholders more time to consider the deal.

    According to both shareholders, Shire is significantly underpaying for TKT,
a specialist in enzyme replacement drugs, which treat rare genetic diseases and
can be among the most expensive drugs in the world. Shire is offering $ 37 a
share for TKT; Porter Orlin and Millenco believe the price should be between $
45 and $ 55 a share.

    The shareholders spoke out after TKT released positive results last week on
trials of a drug to treat the rare condition, Hunter syndrome. The drug,
codenamed I2S, would be the first treatment for the syndrome, which leads to
slow mental development, enlarged internal organs and disfigurement. There are
only 2,000 sufferers world-wide but enzyme replacement therapies such as I2S can
command high prices.

    Alex Porter, the president of Porter Orlin, said of Shire: 'They gave a
valuation before the good results were released. It is a little better than
that. If you add up the value of the parts it comes to $ 45 to $ 55 a share'.

    Millenco holds 8.8 per cent of TKT and Porter Orlin has 5.6 per cent. But
both companies' voting rights are considerably less because their votes will be
based on their holdings when the deal was announced in April. Both have
increased their stakes considerably since then. Millenco will be able to vote on
shares worth only 1.8 per cent of TKT, and Porter Orlin will be able to vote on
a 3.5 per cent holding.

    Shire said it would press ahead with the shareholder vote. A spokeswoman
said: 'We believe it is a good deal. We would not have made the offer if we did
not.'

    Shire has already faced criticism of a different kind in the UK. Its
shareholders, including Britannic Asset Management, said it was paying far too
much for TKT when Shire announced the deal.

    Shire's larger rival, GlaxoSmithKline, faces opposition from US shareholders
in the biotech Corixa, who say the British company is trying to get the company
too cheaply.

LOAD-DATE: July 6, 2005


                             424 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2005 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                             June 28, 2005, Tuesday

SECTION: First Edition; FEATURES; Pg. 51

LENGTH: 334 words

HEADLINE: REALITY THEATRE: ART IN LABORATORY CONDITIONS;
 GENES TALKING ICA LONDON SW1

BYLINE: CHARLOTTE CRIPPS

HIGHLIGHT:
Life begins: scientists will be sequencing genes

BODY:


    The ICA is about to turn itself into a science laboratory, where volunteer
scientists will conduct genuine DNA experiments in front of the public. 'It is
about culture rather than art,' says Dr Julie Webb, a scientist herself and the
curator of this rather unusual installation. Her aim is to demystify science: 'I
want to change the perceptions of what science is about and what scientists are
like.'

    Using hi-tech DNA sequencing technology, the volunteers will be analysing a
candidate gene for Specialist Language Impairment (SLI), a disorder
characterised by problems with verbal communication. 'By comparing the DNA of 50
SLI patients and 50 normal people, we hope to identify the changes in the gene
that cause SLI,' Webb says.

    Also on view to the public will be the more mundane tasks undertaken by
scientists, including washing glassware and preparing sequencing reactions in
test-tubes. As curator, will Webb be getting her hands dirty? 'If one day a
volunteer scientist calls in sick, I'll have to put on my white coat and go in
there myself,' she says.

    Members of the public can join in the work, Webb adds. 'They will be invited
to read the DNA sequences on the graph, and look for the changes themselves and
contribute to the experiment.'

    This is the second sci-art project for Webb, a trained molecular biologist.
Safe Delivery, a play about gene therapy, was performed at the Edinburgh
Festival in 2000. It was written by Webb's playwright father, Tom McGrath, using
Webb's scientific knowledge as its backbone. As a child, her father also ran one
of the first contemporary art centres in Glasgow. 'This has given me more ease
in crossing the line between science and art.'

    Webb is pleased that SLI is finally taking centre stage at the ICA. 'Not
only is there a general mistrust of science in our society but other genetic
research, such as SLI, gets overshadowed by bigger news stories such as the GM
food debate.'

    4 to 18 July (020-7930 3647; www.ica.org.uk)

LOAD-DATE: June 28, 2005


                             430 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2005 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                             June 21, 2005, Tuesday

SECTION: First Edition; BUSINESS; Pg. 61

LENGTH: 344 words

HEADLINE: SHIRE MAKES SENSE OF US DEAL WITH DRUG TRIAL SUCCESS

BYLINE: BY STEPHEN FOLEY

BODY:


    Shire Pharmaceuticals has unveiled positive trial data from one of the drugs
it is buying as part of its controversial $ 1.6bn (£875m) acquisition of a US
biotech company.

    Shares in the FTSE 100 drug maker shot up 6 per cent yesterday after details
of the trial, of a drug for the rare genetic condition Hunter syndrome, were
released in the US.

    The data had come to be seen by many as critical for winning shareholder
approval for the acquisition of Transkaryotic Therapies (TKT), which upset the
market when it was announced in April. The stock closed 5 per cent higher at
627.5p, its best level since February.

    TKT's drug, codenamed I2S, would be the first treatment for Hunter syndrome,
a rare condition caused by the lack of a particular enzyme. It leads to slow
mental development, enlarged internal organs and disfigurement. There are only
2,000 sufferers world-wide, but enzyme replacement therapies (ERT) such as I2S
can expect to command high prices.

    Shire maintained it had never doubted the trial results would be positive,
despite claims by some analysts that it was taking a huge gamble by agreeing to
buy TKT before the pivotal trial data was published.

    Shares in Shire fell more than 10 per cent in the two days after its
acquisition of TKT was announced. The deal, which uses up all Shire's cash pile
in one go, attracted criticism from some UK shareholders, including an
unprecedented public attack from Britannic Asset Management, a 2 per cent
shareholder, which said the deal 'undermines shareholder value and destroys
Shire's growth prospects in a single blow'.

    Britannic maintained its opposition yesterday, but a charm offensive in the
City and in the US by Shire's management has thawed attitudes. Opponents
conceded that only the failure of I2S, which accounts for an estimated one-third
of the value of TKT, would have derailed the deal, which will be put to
shareholders next month.

    Hunter syndrome patients dosed with I2S could walk 44 metres compared to
just 7 metres by those in the placebo group.

LOAD-DATE: June 21, 2005


                             433 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2005 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                              May 6, 2005, Friday

SECTION: First Edition; BUSINESS; Pg. 66

LENGTH: 782 words

HEADLINE: MARKET REPORT: SHIRE SLIDES AS LARGEST INVESTOR CUTS STAKE

BYLINE: BY STEPHEN FOLEY

BODY:


    Just how supportive is Shire Pharmaceuticals' largest shareholder of its
controversial $ 1.6bn (£840m) deal to buy the US biotech Transkaryotic
Therapies?

    This was the question being asked yesterday as it emerged that Franklin
Resources, the giant US investment manager, has cut its stake in Shire from 12.9
per cent to 11.9 per cent in the past few days.

    Franklin has been understood to be likely to back the acquisition, despite
calls from some smaller shareholders for it to be voted down. Vocal opponents,
including Britannic Asset Management, have called it a value-destroying deal, a
risky acquisition made at the wrong price and in contradiction of Shire's
previous strategy.

    Yet the revelation that Franklin is voting differently with its feet sent
Shire's shares down 5p to 558p yesterday. The stock fell 10 per cent in the two
days after the announcement of the deal and has recovered only a little.

    Fidelity, Shire's number two shareholder, has upped its stake from 5.9 per
cent to 6.1 per cent, after an investor roadshow by Matt Emmens, the chief
executive, where he argued that the acquisition will add several highly
profitable new products to Shire's portfolio and will boost earnings from 2007.

    It was a bad day for shares in all the heavyweight pharmaceuticals
companies, as investors switched back into the mining and financial sectors
which have been unloved over previous days. It all balanced out as a 19.8 point
gain for the FTSE 100, its fifth successive positive day, taking the index to
4,902.3. Xstrata was the miner with the major share price leap, up 26p to 942p,
followed by BHP Billiton, 18p better at 667.5p. Deutsche Bank has abandoned its
negative stance on European resources stocks after recent share price falls.

    Signet became the latest retailer to warn of deteriorating sales to the UK
consumer, and the jeweller's shares were off a penny at 97.5p. There was also
speculation of poor trading at Kesa Electricals, the owner of Comet, off 5.5p at
256.5p; WH Smith, down 5.5p to 330.5p; and Halfords, off 4.25p at 264.75p. As
for Kingfisher, the owner of B&Q, which has announced one of the worst sets of
current trading figures of recent weeks, its shares managed to hold steady at
253p. The company was again being talked of as an acquisition target for Home
Depot of the US, and Goldman Sachs put out a handy research note explaining how
Home Depot would get an 8 per cent boost to its earnings this year, even it paid
a 20 per cent premium to Kingfisher's current price.

    Some long-term holders of Sportingbet, the online gambling group, were
taking money off the table. They have impressive winnings to bank, since this
stock was below £1 a year ago and as low as 18p in 2003. It was still 272p after
yesterday's 10p fall. The theory behind the profit-taking is that Sportingbet
shares have been driven higher by their scarcity value because it has been the
only pure online gaming stock on the market. Until now. The suggestion is that
Party Gaming, the owner of the hugely successful Party Poker brand, could float
sooner rather than later, perhaps next month. And Cassava Enterprises, the owner
of 888.com, is also lining up a flotation.

    Rumours of imminent positive news from its mining project in the Philippines
helped push Minerals Exploration shares up 1.5p to 10.5p. And Regal Petroleum
bounced 10p to 263.5p after its thumping decline of the past 10 days. The
company raised £45m at 390p just last week but there are fears its Greek oil
wells are uncommercial.

    There was something akin to despair surrounding Highbury House
Communications, the magazine publisher whose takeover by Future collapsed after
being referred to the Competition Commission last month. Highbury admits it has
a giant task on its hands to cut debt and refocus the business on a much smaller
core of titles. Any rescue package will probably include a move to AIM, where
investors holding the stock in Peps and Isas will be unable to stay in, and
there were growing fears yesterday that management will be unable to find an
attractive-enough core to justify new investors buying into the massive equity
fundraising that looks necessary to keep the company going. The shares were the
worst performers on the market, the penny fall to 1.75p representing a 36 per
cent loss of value. Future, which is buying some titles from Highbury, was
steady at 78p.

    And despair, too, at MKM, the marketing company which is still in dispute
with Express Newspapers over a 'cruises for £10' promotion which went wrong and
for which MKM has received damaging publicity. Floated at 42p in June, the
shares were down 1.25p to a new low of 6p.

LOAD-DATE: May 6, 2005


                             443 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2005 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            April 30, 2005, Saturday

SECTION: First Edition; BUSINESS; Pg. 54

LENGTH: 280 words

HEADLINE: SHIRE CONFIDENT OF VICTORY IN US DEAL

BYLINE: BY JAMES DALEY

BODY:


    Shire Pharmaceuticals, the FTSE 100 drug company, claimed victory in its bid
to win shareholder approval for its controversial $ 1.6bn (£837m) acquisition of
Transkaryotic Therapies (TKT) yesterday, brushing aside claims that a
substantial proportion of its investors opposed the deal.

    A handful of major shareholders have spoken out against the deal since it
was announced last week, with Britannic Asset Management " which holds a 2 per
cent stake " reiterating its dissatisfaction, even after a meeting with the
management.

    However, speaking after the company's first quarter results presentation
yesterday, Matthew Emmens, Shire's chief executive, said the dissidents were
merely a vocal minority rather than a serious threat to the deal's success.

    'In terms of numbers, there are not that many that are sceptical,' he said.
'We've been to see the top 30 shareholders and when we explained the deal, most
were happy with it. But you can't make everybody happy.'

    A shareholder vote to approve the deal will be held in July or August.
However, Mr Emmens said he did not expect to have any problems in mustering the
51 per cent of the vote that he needs to complete the deal.

    He reassured shareholders that the meeting would come after the results of a
phase three trial for I2S, a new enzyme replacement therapy which is being
developed by TKT. Mr Emmens dismissed suggestions by analysts that a poor result
to the trial could derail the entire TKT deal.

    He said that the chances of the trial turning out negative results was very
slim. However, he insisted that even if the results were negative, it would not
be 'material' to the overall deal.

LOAD-DATE: April 30, 2005


                             446 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2005 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                             April 29, 2005, Friday

SECTION: First Edition; NEWS; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 859 words

HEADLINE: HEART TRANSPLANT BABY CELEBRATES BEING 'SPECIAL' ON HER 18TH BIRTHDAY

BYLINE: BY MAXINE FRITH

HIGHLIGHT:
Kaylee Davidson aged five months in 1987 PA; Kaylee Davidson with her mother
Carol. Ms Davidson, one of Britain's youngest heart transplant survivors, marked
her 18th birthday by launching a nationwide appeal for donors NORTH NEWS

BODY:


    One of Britain's youngest surviving heart transplant patients has celebrated
her 18th birthday. Kaylee Davidson was just five months old and expected to die
within days when she underwent surgery in 1987.

    The donor heart was the size of a plum and doctors were not even sure that
it would grow with her but she is now a healthy adult who campaigns to increase
the number of people on the organ donor register.

    As she celebrated her birthday at a fundraising lunch for transplant
charities, Ms Davidson said: 'I grew up with the feeling that I was special and
I do feel lucky to be alive.

    She added: 'I often think about my donor family and can't thank them enough
for the second chance I was given to live. I am living proof that people can
make a difference by becoming an organ donor.'

    The teenager takes four tablets a day to prevent rejection and control her
blood pressure, but otherwise leads a normal, healthy life. She is studying
performing arts and dance at college in Sunderland and is due to represent Great
Britain in the World Transplant Games in Canada this summer.

    She first took part in the Games when she was just two years old, competing
in a wellie-throwing competition.

    Ms Davidson was born healthy but within a few weeks, developed
cardiomyopathy, a virus that destroys the heart muscle.

    She was taken to the Freeman Hospital near her home in Newcastle upon Tyne
and placed on the waiting list for a donor heart, but doctors warned her parents
that nobody in Britain had attempted a transplant on such a tiny baby before.

    Surgeons in the United States had operated on babies her age, but the infant
patient was too ill to be flown abroad for treatment.

    Lynne Holt was the transplant co-ordinator dealing with the Davidson family
when a heart was found for their daughter. She sat with Mr and Mrs Davidson
throughout the five-hour operation and has remained close friends with Ms
Davidson.

    Ms Holt said: 'The call came in one late afternoon when Kaylee had been on
the transplant list for about three weeks.

    'She was critically ill in intensive care and we were amazed that a heart
small enough had been found. When we were doing the operation we couldn't
believe how small the heart actually was " it was the size of a plum.

    'It was incredible because nobody had operated on a baby this small and we
didn't even know whether the heart would grow with her or not.'

    The donated heart came from a baby girl of around Ms Davidson's age who had
died in a car crash, along with her mother. The dead baby's father was in the
crash but not injured and had to make the decision to donate her heart.

    Ms Holt said: 'It must have been an incredibly hard thing for him to do but
it saved Kaylee's life. He knew the heart had gone to her but they have never
met.

    'This case just shows why people should talk about organ donation and go on
the register.'

    Chris McGregor, the surgeon who operated on Ms Davidson, now works in the
United States, although Ms Holt is still working at the Freeman Hospital in
Newcastle. Mrs Davidson said: 'It only seems like yesterday that all that
happened. The doctors performed what at the time seemed like a miracle.

    'To get her back and see her flourish into the lovely, healthy teenager she
has become has been amazing.'

    She added: 'It can happen to anyone " we were an ordinary family who had
something extraordinary happen to us.'

    Only one other child in Britain has undergone a transplant at a younger age
and is still alive " a boy who was operated on at seven weeks in 1997.

    Little miracles

    n Louise Brown was the world's first baby to be born after in vitro
fertilisation (IVF). Born on 25 July 1978 at Oldham general hospital in Greater
Manchester, her arrival marked a revolution in fertility treatment. Within six
months, more than 5,000 people in Britain had applied for IVF treatment and
since then more than a million 'test-tube babies' have been born.

    n Britain's smallest surviving baby is Aaliyah Hart, who was born weighing
12 ounces in May 2003. She was 12 weeks premature and had failed to grow in the
womb, meaning she was just 9 inches long at birth. Doctors gave her a 10 per
chance of survival, but she defied the odds and is described by her mother as
'bright as a button'.

    n In 2002, Rhys Evans was the first child in the UK to undergo gene therapy
to cure a potentially fatal condition that had left him with no immunity to
infection. Until he was 18 months old, Rhys had spent most of his life in
hospital with severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID), also known as 'baby in a
bubble' syndrome. Doctors took bone marrow from Rhys and used a virus to correct
the faulty gene and boost his immune system. Rhys has now been able to leave his
sterile hospital room for a normal life.

    n The world's only surviving all-girl sextuplets were born in Britain and
celebrated their 21st birthdays last year. Hannah, Luci, Ruth, Sarah, Kate and
Jennie Walton were conceived naturally, despite their mother Janet being told
she could not have children. They were born at 32 weeks, within four minutes of
each other.

LOAD-DATE: April 29, 2005


                             449 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2005 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                           April 27, 2005, Wednesday

SECTION: First Edition; FEATURES; Pg. 42,43

LENGTH: 860 words

HEADLINE: SCIENCE: THE EYES HAVE IT;
 THANKS TO LASER SURGERY, TIGER WOODS NOW HAS BETTER-THAN-PERFECT

BYLINE: CLARE RUDEBECK

BODY:


    Nothing destroys a sporting reputation like steroids. In 1998, Mark McGwire
was a baseball hero. Wearing a T-shirt bearing the slogan, 'If Popeye wants his
arms back " he'll have to wait until October', he obliterated the record for the
number of home runs in a season. Last month, McGwire was branded a cheat for
using a legal, performance-enhancing steroid precursor, androstenedione, when he
achieved the feat.

    It may seem like a simple case of right and wrong. McGwire used a steroid
precursor, albeit one that was legal in baseball, and he has been punished. But
the line between right and wrong in sport is being increasingly blurred. It is
now possible to enhance performance through surgery and, very soon, gene
therapy. Accusations of double standards are in the air.

    When McGwire achieved his record, he was also wearing contact lenses.
Natural vision is 20/20, but McGwire's lenses improved his vision to 20/10, so
he could see, at a distance of 20ft, what a person of normal vision could see at
10ft. Clearly, that could make a difference when you're trying to hit a fast
ball. But the hearing, which criticised him for his artificially enhanced
muscles, made no mention of his artificially enhanced eyesight.

    Earlier this month, Tiger Woods won golf's biggest tournament, The Masters,
with the help of super-human eyesight. In 1999, he had laser eye surgery, which
gave him 20/15 vision. After the surgery, he won seven of his next 10 events.
Other top golfers who have upgraded their vision include England's Lee Westood,
Fiji's Vijay Singh, Ireland's Padraig Harrington and America's Tom Kite. The
golfing establishment does nothing to stop players artificially improving
themselves in this way. The PGA European Tour, which represents top European
golfers, had no comment on the subject. While steroids bring public
condemnation, laser eye surgery provokes, at worst, curiosity.

    The closer you look, the murkier it becomes. Take the drug EPO
(erythropoietin), which is banned by the World Anti-Doping Agency (WADA), set up
to clean up sport. The drug, which increases the capacity of the blood to carry
oxygen, was developed in the mid-Eighties to help people who suffered from
severe anaemia. Popular in endurance sports, it almost destroyed the European
cycling circuit in the Nineties when stockpiles of the drug were confiscated
from cyclists' hotel rooms.

    However, altitude training " used by many athletes including Paula Radcliffe
" has the same effect: increasing the red blood cell count and enabling the
blood to carry more oxygen. To save the inconvenience of travelling to a
mountain, some athletes use altitude chambers. Why is altitude training allowed,
but not the use of EPO? 'Because using EPO is a health risk,' says Russell
Langley, a spokesman for UK Sport, the government body which promotes excellence
in sport.

    That taking EPO to enhance performance can be dangerous is unequivocal.
Several deaths among professional cyclists in the late Eighties and early
Nineties have been linked to the drug. When WADA decides whether to ban a method
or substance, it uses three criteria, and the risk of harm is only one. The
other two are whether it will enhance performance and whether it violates the
'spirit of sport'. A method or substance must meet only two of the three
criteria to be banned. Arguably, altitude training enhances performance and
violates the 'spirit of sport' because only athletes with wealthy sponsors can
afford it. Indeed, WADA is reviewing the use of altitude chambers, and they may
be outlawed by next year.

    The issue becomes murkier still when you delve into the next big threat to
the integrity of sport: gene doping. This involves injecting foreign DNA into an
athlete to achieve similar results to those achieved through drug-taking. But
there is no test for gene doping.

    Gene doping is still in its infancy. Its effect on humans is unknown. WADA
do not consider it a threat to sport. But Dr Andy Miah, a leading British
scientist, claims that so-called genetically-modified athletes could already be
competing in major events. 'But it is not desirable for WADA to admit it,' he
said, 'because they have no measures in place to stop it.'

    Dr Miah predicts that the eight-second 100 metres could be achieved in a few
years with the help of gene doping. Meanwhile WADA, which recognised the threat
of gene doping two years ago, is developing a test for it, and is confident of
success. But Dr Miah, who is among the country's leading bioethicists with
positions at Glasgow and Paisley universities, believes it may not be possible
to test for all types of gene doping.

    This may sound like the death knell for professional sport. But Dr Miah
believes that gene doping could be good for sport if we changed our beliefs
about cheating. 'The idea of the naturally perfect athlete is romantic
nonsense,' he says. 'An athlete achieves what he or she achieves through all
sorts of means " technology, sponsorship, support and so on. Utilising genetic
modification is merely a continuation of the way sport works; it allows us to
create more extraordinary performances.'

LOAD-DATE: April 27, 2005


                             455 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2005 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            April 23, 2005, Saturday

SECTION: First Edition; BUSINESS; Pg. 46

LENGTH: 655 words

HEADLINE: SHIRE FACES GROWING SHAREHOLDER REVOLT

BYLINE: BY STEPHEN FOLEY

BODY:


    Several significant shareholders in Shire Pharmaceuticals have spoken out
against the drug maker's $ 1.6bn (£840m) deal to buy a Nasdaq-listed biotech
company.

    A number are promising to vote against the acquisition of Transkaryotic
Therapies (TKT) when it is put before investors in the summer, and others say
the company must work hard to persuade them of the merits of a deal that they
say represents a strategic U-turn.

    The comments came as Shire shares were the worst performers in the FTSE 100
for the second day running.

    At 539p, down 20.5p, they have fallen almost 10 per cent since the
acquisition was announced.

    Britannic Asset Management, which owns 2 per cent of Shire, went public with
its opposition, saying the deal 'is at total odds with the declared strategy of
the management'.

    It is canvassing support for alternative plans, which could see the
pharmaceuticals firm license a single drug from TKT rather than buy the whole
company, or walk away entirely.

    Peter Reid, the chief investment officer at Britannic, said: 'This is a bad
deal. The group will spend its entire cash surplus on a loss-making US biotech
company. It undermines shareholder value and destroys Shire's growth prospects
in a single blow.

    'Britannic has identified no good reason for this deal to go ahead and would
encourage others to consider this proposal very carefully.'

    Loss-making TKT is a specialist in enzyme replacement drugs, which treat
rare genetic diseases and which can be among the most expensive drugs in the
world. Shire was attracted by TKT's Dynepo, a treatment for kidney problems,
which will complement Shire's own kidney drug Fosrenol, and the company has one
other launched drug, with two others in late-stage trials.

    Shire's chief executive, Matt Emmens, believes that TKT bolsters Shire's
pipeline of new drugs as the company prepares for the arrival of copycat
competition to its best-selling drug, Adderall, probably next year. The deal
will enhance earnings from 2007, although analysts believe it could knock
anything up to 20 per cent from this year's profits.

    Britannic's unusually outspoken comments were echoed in private by other
significant shareholders. One said: 'We're livid. It is not what we have been
led to believe would happen. They have spent a lot of money and there was no
justification of the price paid. The company they are buying has any number of
issues, in terms of litigation and drug development risk. No wonder the chief
executive of TKT was quoted as saying he was 'gratified' at the deal.'

    Mr Emmens began a series of meetings yesterday with investors in the United
States, while Angus Russell, the finance director, is meeting UK institutions in
a bid to swing support behind the acquisition. Shire said it hoped it would be
able to persuade Britannic and others to support the deal after meetings next
week.

    Mr Emmens has always said acquisitions could be of single products or of
whole companies, a spokeswoman said.

    Only 40 per cent of Shire's investors are based in the UK, with a further 40
per cent held by American investors. The company believes that US investors are
more familiar with enzyme replacement therapy, which it says is lower-risk and
higher-reward than most biotech work, and are more likely to see the long-term
opportunities created by the deal. Shire's biggest shareholder is the US
institution Franklin Resources, with almost 13 per cent.

    Fidelity, with 6 per cent is not believed to be opposed to the acquisition.

    Two other larger shareholder said they remained open to being convinced of
TKT's merits. One said: 'The market is voting with its feet, but it could be
over-reacting. When it came to guiding us what to expect it would spend its cash
on, this isn't what we were led to expect would happen, and it is expensive on a
short-term view, but it is a good fit and we could easily be persuaded.'

LOAD-DATE: April 25, 2005


                             464 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2005 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                             April 22, 2005, Friday

SECTION: First Edition; BUSINESS; Pg. 50

LENGTH: 453 words

HEADLINE: SHIRE SHARES TUMBLE FOLLOWING $ 1.6BN GENETIC DISEASES DEAL

BYLINE: BY STEPHEN FOLEY

HIGHLIGHT:
Matt Emmens: Needs to convince shareholders

BODY:


    Shire Pharmaceuticals, the FTSE 100 speciality pharmaceuticals company, is
paying $ 1.6bn (£800m) to acquire a Nasdaq-listed maker of drugs for rare
diseases.

    The acquisition, which means the company has spent its long-hoarded cash
pile in one go, sent Shire shares tumbling as analysts concluded it had
overpaid. But Matt Emmens, chief executive, said it would bolster the company's
pipeline of new drugs and reduce its focus on the US market.

    Shire said the deal would boost its earnings by 2007, when Transkaryotic
Therapies (TKT), the Pennsylvania-based biotech, is forecast to move into
profit.

    TKT's chief executive, Michael Astrue, walked out yesterday in protest at
the takeover after being outvoted on the company's board. Shire said it had
worked closely with David Pendergast, the chief operating officer, who will take
over in the run-up to the closure of the deal, which is dependent on a
shareholder vote by both sides.

    Shire shares fell 47p to 559.5p, the worst performance by a blue chip stock
as investors questioned the price and the rationale of the deal. 'I want this
deal and I will do everything to convince shareholders of its merit,' Mr Emmens
said.

    TKT has two drugs approved for sale in Europe. The first is Dynepo for the
treatment of kidney disease, which Shire says will be a good fit with Fosrenol,
its existing kidney drug. Mr Emmens said: 'We came to TKT by finding that
product and wanting to license it. We liked it so much we bought the company.'

    The second drug is Replagal for the rare genetic disorder Fabry disease,
where an enzyme deficiency causes a series of potentially fatal medical
problems.

    Unusually, Shire is not counting on Dynepo or Replagal to be made available
in the US, the world's most lucrative drug market. Replagal was turned down by
US regulators on safety grounds. And TKT's development partner for Dynepo is
involved in a patent dispute over the drug with the US firm Amgen.

    TKT is a specialist in enzyme replacement therapy. Although the conditions
that this type of therapy can treat are usually rare, drugs can command premium
prices. Genzyme, the US biotech which is the market leader in this area, owns
some of the most expensive drugs in the world.

    Shire will use its cash pile of £700m and £500m of bank debt to fund the
deal. It has long been looking for product or company acquisitions to boost its
portfolio of drugs, ahead of the arrival of copycat rivals to Adderall, its
best-selling attention deficit drug.

    Other products in TKT's pipeline include I2S for Hunter's disease and an
early stage product aimed at treating Gaucher's disease, a genetic disorder
among Ashkenazi Jews.

    OUTLOOK, PAGE 53

LOAD-DATE: April 22, 2005


                             465 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2005 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                             April 22, 2005, Friday

SECTION: First Edition; BUSINESS; Pg. 53

LENGTH: 271 words

HEADLINE: OUTLOOK: SHIRE CHOOSES THE WRONG TARGET

BYLINE: JEREMY WARNER

BODY:


    With a tidy little £700m of net cash burning a hole in the balance sheet,
Shire Pharmaceuticals has been priming the stock market to expect acquisitions
for some years now. No surprises, then, in the fact of yesterday's agreed
takeover. More puzzling was the target. Transkaryotic who?

    Matthew Emmens struggled to explain even what the US-based biotech does, let
alone why he's buying it. On any measure Transkaryotic Therapies looks
expensive, its chief executive has just inexplicably resigned, and it doesn't
even have any products licensed in the US, the country Shire is supposedly meant
to be targeting.

    Indeed, the only obvious rational is that both companies focus on medicines
sold to specialist physicians, so neither of them require a large salesforce.
That's not much of a reason for slashing out $ 1.6bn. Mr Emmens was unable to
say even what the scope for cost savings would be, but then this is not about
cost savings, he's keen to stress. Rather it's about acquiring a promising new
pipeline in conjunction with biotech research and development expertise.

    Well maybe, but if investors really wanted an exposure to Trans-thing-
a-mejig, then they could have gone and bought it a good deal cheaper directly on
Nasdaq. From the outside, this looks like one of those rushed, spend the money
quick before investors start to ask for it back, transactions. Mr Emmens faces
an uphill struggle persuading the City he's doing the right thing. Let's hope he
manages to do better than he did yesterday, for there's a $ 40m break fee to pay
if he's forced to retreat, not to mention his own pay-off.

LOAD-DATE: April 22, 2005


                             466 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2005 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                             April 22, 2005, Friday

SECTION: First Edition; BUSINESS; Pg. 50

LENGTH: 453 words

HEADLINE: SHIRE SHARES TUMBLE FOLLOWING $ 1.6BN GENETIC DISEASES DEAL

BYLINE: BY STEPHEN FOLEY

HIGHLIGHT:
Matt Emmens: Needs to convince shareholders

BODY:


    Shire Pharmaceuticals, the FTSE 100 speciality pharmaceuticals company, is
paying $ 1.6bn (£800m) to acquire a Nasdaq-listed maker of drugs for rare
diseases.

    The acquisition, which means the company has spent its long-hoarded cash
pile in one go, sent Shire shares tumbling as analysts concluded it had
overpaid. But Matt Emmens, chief executive, said it would bolster the company's
pipeline of new drugs and reduce its focus on the US market.

    Shire said the deal would boost its earnings by 2007, when Transkaryotic
Therapies (TKT), the Pennsylvania-based biotech, is forecast to move into
profit.

    TKT's chief executive, Michael Astrue, walked out yesterday in protest at
the takeover after being outvoted on the company's board. Shire said it had
worked closely with David Pendergast, the chief operating officer, who will take
over in the run-up to the closure of the deal, which is dependent on a
shareholder vote by both sides.

    Shire shares fell 47p to 559.5p, the worst performance by a blue chip stock
as investors questioned the price and the rationale of the deal. 'I want this
deal and I will do everything to convince shareholders of its merit,' Mr Emmens
said.

    TKT has two drugs approved for sale in Europe. The first is Dynepo for the
treatment of kidney disease, which Shire says will be a good fit with Fosrenol,
its existing kidney drug. Mr Emmens said: 'We came to TKT by finding that
product and wanting to license it. We liked it so much we bought the company.'

    The second drug is Replagal for the rare genetic disorder Fabry disease,
where an enzyme deficiency causes a series of potentially fatal medical
problems.

    Unusually, Shire is not counting on Dynepo or Replagal to be made available
in the US, the world's most lucrative drug market. Replagal was turned down by
US regulators on safety grounds. And TKT's development partner for Dynepo is
involved in a patent dispute over the drug with the US firm Amgen.

    TKT is a specialist in enzyme replacement therapy. Although the conditions
that this type of therapy can treat are usually rare, drugs can command premium
prices. Genzyme, the US biotech which is the market leader in this area, owns
some of the most expensive drugs in the world.

    Shire will use its cash pile of £700m and £500m of bank debt to fund the
deal. It has long been looking for product or company acquisitions to boost its
portfolio of drugs, ahead of the arrival of copycat rivals to Adderall, its
best-selling attention deficit drug.

    Other products in TKT's pipeline include I2S for Hunter's disease and an
early stage product aimed at treating Gaucher's disease, a genetic disorder
among Ashkenazi Jews.

    OUTLOOK, PAGE 53

LOAD-DATE: April 25, 2005


                             467 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2005 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                             April 22, 2005, Friday

SECTION: First Edition; BUSINESS; Pg. 53

LENGTH: 271 words

HEADLINE: OUTLOOK: SHIRE CHOOSES THE WRONG TARGET

BYLINE: JEREMY WARNER

BODY:


    With a tidy little £700m of net cash burning a hole in the balance sheet,
Shire Pharmaceuticals has been priming the stock market to expect acquisitions
for some years now. No surprises, then, in the fact of yesterday's agreed
takeover. More puzzling was the target. Transkaryotic who?

    Matthew Emmens struggled to explain even what the US-based biotech does, let
alone why he's buying it. On any measure Transkaryotic Therapies looks
expensive, its chief executive has just inexplicably resigned, and it doesn't
even have any products licensed in the US, the country Shire is supposedly meant
to be targeting.

    Indeed, the only obvious rational is that both companies focus on medicines
sold to specialist physicians, so neither of them require a large salesforce.
That's not much of a reason for slashing out $ 1.6bn. Mr Emmens was unable to
say even what the scope for cost savings would be, but then this is not about
cost savings, he's keen to stress. Rather it's about acquiring a promising new
pipeline in conjunction with biotech research and development expertise.

    Well maybe, but if investors really wanted an exposure to Trans-thing-
a-mejig, then they could have gone and bought it a good deal cheaper directly on
Nasdaq. From the outside, this looks like one of those rushed, spend the money
quick before investors start to ask for it back, transactions. Mr Emmens faces
an uphill struggle persuading the City he's doing the right thing. Let's hope he
manages to do better than he did yesterday, for there's a $ 40m break fee to pay
if he's forced to retreat, not to mention his own pay-off.

LOAD-DATE: April 25, 2005


                             473 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2005 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                           March 16, 2005, Wednesday

SECTION: First Edition; FEATURES

LENGTH: 1428 words

HEADLINE: SCIENCE&TECHNOLOGY: CREATING THE STUFF OF LIFE;
 MANY OF US BELIEVE THE USE OF GENE THERAPY TO CREATE SAVIOUR

BYLINE: STEVE CONNOR

HIGHLIGHT:
Genes that fit: Raj and Shahana Hashmi and their son Zain (above); and (below)
Molly Nash cuddles her brother and saviour sibling' Adam John Giles/PA; AP

BODY:


    The tragic case of the Hashmi family has reignited the debate over what is
meant by "designer babies". Raj and Shahana Hashmi want to have a baby by in
vitro fertilisation (IVF). Not only do they want the baby to be free of genetic
disease; they also want it to be screened so that it will match the tissue of
their six-year-old son Zain, who suffers from a rare blood disorder. If Zain
does not receive a stem-cell transplant from his "saviour sibling", he'll almost
certainly die. Their case is now being considered by the House of Lords.

    The term "designer baby" has been widely used in the context of a range of
difficult issues surrounding developments in reproductive medicine. Pre-natal
genetic diagnosis (PGD) - when a single cell from an early IVF embryo is removed
and genetically analysed - enables doctors to test for a range of inherited
disorders, as well as carry out tissue typing.

    In 2000, Lisa and Jack Nash of Denver, Colorado were the first couple to
benefit from the idea of creating "saviour siblings" by PGD when their son Adam
was born. The Nashes, both carriers of Fanconi anaemia, had a six-year-old
daughter, Molly, who was born with the rare inherited bone- marrow disease.
Scientists tested 15 of the Nashes' embryos for the presence of the diseased
gene. They then went a step further to see which one also had the same tissue
type as Molly. The result was Adam, who donated a stem-cell transplant that
helped his sister to recover.

    For some, the idea of creating a baby to order is anathema. For others, it
is nothing more sinister than planning a family with the benefits of modern
medicine. However, the tortuous ethical and legal arguments over designer babies
such as Adam will seem relatively trivial compared to the impending debate over
the technological developments in reproductive genetics that are now on the
horizon.

    Some scientists believe we are on the verge of being able to engineer the
human gene-pool for the first time. They're not talking about straightforward
gene therapy, but something called germline gene therapy, when the genes of
future generations can be changed for ever. This would make today's "designer
babies" appear decidedly low-tech compared with what might be possible in years
to come.

    We are, to some extent, already accustomed to the idea of tinkering with
genes. Last week, doctors in London said they had successfully cured a second
child of a fatal inherited condition with the help of gene therapy, a technique
that replaces - or, more correctly, augments - a faulty gene with a normal,
healthy version.

    Gene therapy has had mixed results. Early experiments led to some disastrous
outcomes. One of the most infamous was the case of Jesse Gelsinger, who died in
1999 after undergoing gene therapy that involved infecting him with a
genetically engineered virus. The intention was that the virus would carry
healthy genes into his liver. Instead, he suffered liver failure.

    This sort of gene therapy targets only the tissues damaged by the faulty
gene. Germline gene therapy involves tinkering with genes at the stage of the
embryo, so that each and every cell of the resulting baby carries the newly
inserted gene. This more radical modification would have far- reaching
consequences because it would also include changing the sperm and eggs of the
mature adult. It would mean that their children would also inherit the altered
genes, which is why it's called "germline" gene therapy. Potentially, it has the
power of changing the genetic make-up of the human species for good.

    In Britain, germline gene therapy is not allowed under current legislation,
but there may soon be calls to look again at the ban, especially in the light of
recent work into artificial human chromosomes (HACs). The idea is to add an
extra chromosome to the complement of 46 that normally reside in most cells of
the body. Some scientists believe that many of the safety concerns about
germline gene therapy can be addressed by refinements in the technology of
making this putative "cousin 47" - the 47th human chromosome.

    Proponents say HACs are inherently safer than other ways of introducing
foreign genes into the body, because the DNA of the artificial chromosomes is
not "naked" but enclosed in a structure that mimics the way human DNA is
naturally stored in each of our 46 chromosomes. They believe HACs can be made to
replicate faithfully each time cells divide, and it could be possible to turn
their genes on or off at will. It might also be possible to include a
self-destruct mechanism that prevents the HAC from being passed on to future
generations if this is of concern.

    The neurobiologists Gregory Stock and John Campbell of the University of
California at Los Angeles have been at the forefront of promoting the idea of
using HACs for human germline gene therapy. "In discussions of cloning and
germline modifications of animals, it's easy to pretend that human manipulations
can be ignored," they say. "But it seems virtually certain that, as these
technologies evolve, their focus will swing back towards ourselves. The real
question is not whether they will be applied to humans, but when, how and to
what extent."

    Artificial chromosomes have been used in genetics for years, notably those
that mimic yeast chromosomes. Huntington Willard of the Case Research University
School of Medicine in Cleveland, Ohio made the first artificial human chromosome
in 1997. He put three types of DNA in a test tube, and the primitive
"chromosome" self-assembled. It survived in the cells for six months, apparently
retaining its integrity during cell division.

    Chromosomes are complex structures, but there seem to be three crucial
components necessary for them to replicate each time the cell divides. One is
the centromere, a structure at the centre of the chromosome that plays a vital
role in aligning the chromosome on the protein "spindles" involved in cell
division. Then there are the telomeres at the end of the chromosome (like the
plastic tips of shoelaces that prevent them from fraying). And there are the
so-called origins of replication, the DNA sequences that initiate duplication of
the chromosome during cell division.

    Stock and Campbell believe it will soon be possible to consider radical
therapies that involve inserting specially-designed HACs into human embryos.
They suggest, for instance, that an HAC could be built containing genes that
confer life-long resistance to HIV. Another idea is to introduce into male
embryos an HAC containing a series of genetic switches that can, when turned on,
trigger the destruction of prostate cancer cells.

    If preventative treatments such as these are shown to work safely, it is not
difficult to envisage an array of treatments delivered as a "gene cassette" on a
single HAC. Perhaps anti-ageing genes could be added to every embryo's extra
chromosome. "Two things will be necessary before human germline engineering can
occur broadly," Stock and Campbell say. "A safe, reliable way of delivering
genetic changes to a human embryo, and genetic modifications so compelling that
large numbers of parents will want them."

    They argue that both are nearer than many people believe because of recent
developments in human artificial chromosomes. "The time to examine and discuss
the realistic benefits and challenges these new reproductive technologies embody
is now, while they are still nascent. And to keep such discussion focused on
realistic possibilities rather than science fiction, it is imperative that
active researchers in the field participate," they say.

    One scenario that has been envisaged if germline gene therapy goes ahead is
the idea of human society being divided between the "gene enriched" and the
"naturals" - some people having the resources to exploit all aspects of the
technology to improve the lives of themselves and their children, with others
left to live and breed naturally. Princeton University's Lee Silver believes
that although such a dystopia is not imminent, it is plausible and could
eventually lead to two species of humans.

    "If the accumulation of genetic knowledge and advances in genetic
enhancement technology continue at the present rate," Silver says, "then by the
end of the third millennium, the genrich class and the natural class will become
the GenRich humans and the Natural humans - entirely separate species with no
ability to cross-breed and with as much romantic interest in each other as a
current human would have for a chimpanzee."

LOAD-DATE: March 16, 2005


                             484 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2005 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                           February 8, 2005, Tuesday

SECTION: First Edition; BUSINESS; Pg. 35

LENGTH: 427 words

HEADLINE: OXFORD BIOMEDICA DIPS 20% AS MERGER FAILS

BYLINE: STEPHEN FOLEY

HIGHLIGHT:
Professor Alan Kingsman, the co-founder and chief executive of Oxford BioMedica
John Lawrence

BODY:


    OXFORD BIOMEDICA is to pursue several further informal bid talks after the
biotech company said yesterday that merger negotiations with its first suitor
had collapsed.

    The negotiations that have just been broken off are believed to have been
with the acquisitive biotech company Vernalis. Sources said the talks stalled
over a number of issues, including valuation. It is also understood that there
was no agreement over the ongoing role of the company's founders, the husband
and wife duo Professors Alan and Susan Kingsman.

    Vernalis is chaired by Peter Fellner, the former chairman of Celltech, with
a mission to consolidate the fragmented UK biotech sector.

    The talks proved a "useful distraction", according to Professor Alan
Kingsman, the chief executive, and are understood to have flushed out other
expressions of interest. He said: "There are lots of smaller and larger
companies active in looking for mergers and acquisitions. It never surprises me
to get a call saying, Alan, let's have a chat about getting the companies
together'."

    Share in the group plunged 20 per cent on news that merger talks with the as
yet mystery suitor had been called off. They closed down 5p at 19.5p, still 10
per cent higher than when rumours of a possible deal began to swirl. Speculative
investors had been betting on a takeover by one of OXB's giant drug development
partners, although analysts said a tie- up with a UK quoted or private biotech
company was more likely.

    OXB was set up by the Kingsmans as a spin-out from Oxford University in
1995, and it specialises in developing drugs using gene therapy. Its most
advanced product, TroVax, which is in the second of the three phases of human
trials necessary for approval, is a treatment for cancer.

    Professor Alan Kingsman said several elements of the proposed merger were
unsatisfactory, but that he would not have stood in the way of a deal that was
in shareholders' best interests. "I am not pathologically possessive of Oxford
BioMedica, although I am totally committed to it. I have no plans to step aside
and I don't particularly want to, but if it is important for shareholder value
then I would step aside.

    "As the products move into phase III and beyond and the emphasis becomes
commercial rather than technical, then it may be time to step aside, but
discussions with partners are now still significantly technical."

    OXB is hopeful that phase II trials results on TroVax, due this month, will
show that it prolongs the life of patients suffering from colorectal cancer.

LOAD-DATE: February 8, 2005


                             488 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2005 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            February 7, 2005, Monday

SECTION: First Edition; BUSINESS; Pg. 40

LENGTH: 66 words

HEADLINE: SMALL TALK: OXFORD PLANS STUDIED

BYLINE: STEPHEN FOLEY

BODY:


    SMALL TALK hears we may be close to a resolution of the merger talks at
Oxford BioMedica, which said it had attracted a mystery suitor last month. A
deal could be less than a fortnight away, although discussions appear to hang on
sorting out a future role for the Kingsmans, the husband and wife academics who
set up the gene therapy company in 1995 as a spin- out for Oxford University.

LOAD-DATE: February 7, 2005


                             490 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2005 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            January 24, 2005, Monday

SECTION: First Edition; BUSINESS; Pg. 42

LENGTH: 326 words

HEADLINE: SMALL TALK: SIGNS POINT TO VERNALIS AS OXB'S MYSTERY SUITOR

BYLINE: STEPHEN FOLEY

BODY:


    THERE'S NOTHING like the admission of bid talks to pep up a stagnant share
price, and Oxford BioMedica, a gene therapy company with a couple of cancer
drugs in the pipeline, was last week's best-performing small- cap share after
admitting it had received "an approach".

    The public statement was forced on the company after speculators got whiff
that something was up and piled into the stock. Wild talk on the bulletin boards
is still predicting a 30p-per-share cash bid from a large pharmaceutical company
or a much bigger biotech specialist from continental Europe or the US - despite
the fact that OXB's statement referred to the possible deal as a "merger".

    Bulls reckon the word merger is a face-saver, often employed by small
companies who are being taken over, but Small Talk hears that the word was
chosen very carefully. The shares, at 22.75p, look vulnerable if the reality
turns out to be a mundane all-share combination with a not- much-bigger biotech
close to home.

    Which is why Small Talk is worried (for the speculators) that the approach
might have come from Vernalis, the former British Biotech, which is back on the
acquisition trail after sorting out marketing problems with its main drug last
year. The company won't rule itself in or out as the bidder, but the respected
analysts at Evolution Securities, adding their own "fuel to the bonfire of
speculation", have come to the same guess.

    Vernalis, chaired by Peter Fellner, has grand plans to consolidate a UK
biotech sector that is still characterised by sub-scale players with too few
drugs, too little money and too-high losses. OXB's cancer products would bolster
Vernalis's own pipeline in this area, but there is also a useful fit between
OXB's more experimental work in Parkinson's disease and the Vernalis pipeline in
neurology.

    Vernalis itself is optimistic about 2005, since it recently signed a new
marketing partner for its migraine drug, Frova.

LOAD-DATE: January 24, 2005


                             493 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2005 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                           January 20, 2005, Thursday

SECTION: First Edition; BUSINESS; Pg. 46

LENGTH: 61 words

HEADLINE: OXFORD BIOMEDICA RISES ON BID TALKS

BODY:


    OXFORD BIOMEDICA, a gene therapy specialist involved in the development of
cancer vaccines, said it had received a takeover approach and was in talks about
a potential merger, sending its shares up from 19.25p to 22.75p. The company,
responding to a recent rise in its share price, said yesterday that the talks
were at an early stage and may lead to an offer.

LOAD-DATE: January 20, 2005


                             497 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2004 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                           December 14, 2004, Tuesday

SECTION: First Edition; FEATURES; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 1337 words

HEADLINE: HEALTH: KEEPING HOPE ALIVE;
 BOYS WITH DUCHENNE MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY FACE THE DEVASTATING PROSPECT

BYLINE: JEROME BURNE Josh Fitzpatrick, who suffers from Duchenne muscular
dystrophy, with his father Paul and sister Hannah Fabio De Paola ; Duchenne
sufferer Rory (right) in the film Inside I'm Dancing'

BODY:


    The consultant said nothing to the two parents. Instead, he passed a note
across the table that contained three devastating lines: Muscle- wasting
disease. Wheelchair by nine. Death by 16. "That was all it said," recalls Gail
Fitzpatrick. "Basically, you feel as if your world has come to an end."

    So their six-year-old son Josh was not flat-footed, for which one consultant
had been treating him for three years. Instead, his problems with walking were
due to a genetic, muscle-wasting disorder known as Duchenne muscular dystrophy
(DMD), for which there is no cure. "We were given no hope," adds his father Paul
Fitzpatrick, a fireman. "The consultant's attitude was: This child will be dead
by 16 or 20. You had better get on with your lives and make the best of it.'"

    That was four years ago, and since then the situation for parents faced with
the shock of a diagnosis of DMD has been transformed, thanks in no small part to
the energy and determination of the Fitzpatricks. From their home in Rotherham,
they have run workshops and set up internet message boards where people can ask
for help and support each other, as well as founding an organisation called
Parent Project UK, dedicated to finding a viable treatment and cure.

    Already, a treatment to repair the faulty gene is due to be put through a
human clinical trial next year. "We have shown in mice that it is possible to
patch up the gene so that it starts working again," says Professor Francesco
Muntoni of Imperial College in London. "This is not a cure because you will have
to keep repeating the treatment, but it may slow the loss of muscle."

    DMD is caused by a mutation in the dystrophin gene that, nobody knows why,
is huge - the largest in the body. It contains the information for making the
protein dystrophin, which is vital for muscle function. Without it, all the
muscles of the body, usually starting with those in the legs, gradually wither
and die, to be replaced by fat. Vital muscles, such as those powering the heart
and lungs, are also eventually affected. Because the gene is found on the X
chromosome, it almost exclusively affects boys - one in every 3,500 births.
Girls with two X chromosomes usually have a functioning version that they can
use.

    When the Fitzpatricks received the devastating news, the first thing they
did was to look it up on the internet to find out all they could about DMD.
"That made us realise that almost nobody we met knew anything about it," says
Paul. "GPs might only see one case in their whole career, and other people would
lump it together with multiple sclerosis or cystic fibrosis." Even the prognosis
they were given was wrong, according to Professor Muntoni. "Today, the average
age of death is 27, and there are many who live into their thirties," he says.

    As a result of their research, the Fitzpatricks gained a sense of power. "We
realised that the situation wasn't totally hopeless," says Paul. They found out
about treatments that, although little used in this country, did seem to make a
difference to patients' lives. For example, Canadian doctors were giving
steroids to patients, and there were journal articles showing that they were
effective. But then they faced a new problem. "We had to persuade the
paediatrician to prescribe the steroids, but the research finally convinced
him." The results have been dramatic. "Since Josh has been on them, his mobility
is 10 times better. He was falling five or six times a day. Now it's about once
a week."

    Another treatment that has helped many sufferers is being put on a
ventilator at night to help their weakened lungs to breath. "It keeps the fluid
out of their lungs, so they have fewer hospital visits for lung infections,"
says Paul. Findings like these were passed on to other parents via the internet,
where those with older children often help those who have just been diagnosed.
"Families with DMD are no longer isolated and without hope," says Paul."I hate
to think what it was like even 10 years ago. Now, the push for treatments comes
from patients."

    Some doctors are happy to work in partnership with empowered parents, but
others find it more threatening. "We had one whose attitude was, I'm the
consultant, I tell you what to do'. Because of this attitude, we still meet
parents who believe that nothing can be done because that's what the
paediatrician told them."

    The lesson that emerges from this is that it is possible to create a life
that works even with DMD. The Fitzpatricks wanted to keep things as normal as
possible for Josh, and so felt it was vital that he stayed at the local school.
"It has been marvellous," says Gail, who works at a call centre. "When he's in
assembly, rather than being in his wheelchair he wants to sit on the floor with
everyone else. But he can't get up. So at the end of assembly, the children
around him just sit there and let him climb up them. It's fabulous."

    In fact, although it is medical breakthroughs that tend to make the
headlines, what can actually make a difference to the lives of people with DMD
and other disabilities is often more mundane. Like adapting the house to the
child's needs - pounds 50,000 - or buying a van that can take a wheelchair -
pounds 8,000. On a disability grant of pounds 300 a month, however, such
life-enhancing changes can be impossible. "One of the major problems for
families with DMD is not so much the muscular decline as having to spend their
lives sorting out practicalities," says Professor Muntoni. "They become drained.
Few have the guts and energy to do what those in the Parent Project are doing."

    On trips to Scandinavia, Professor Muntoni sees a different picture. "I'm
always struck by the quality of life of people with DMD there, simply because
more money is available." Indeed, a recent British film, Inside I'm Dancing,
centres on the struggles of two disabled young men, one with DMD, to lead
independent lives.

    In the face of these difficulties, one can but marvel at the courage and
optimism of the Fitzpatricks and the other parents. "They say we'll have a
medical breakthrough in the next five years," says Gail. "Josh will be 15 and
full time in a wheelchair. A patch might not give him back the use of his legs,
but if it keeps his heart and lungs working, and he can move his arms, he's got
90 per cent of his life back."

    The most familiar approach to correcting a faulty gene is with gene therapy
- inserting a working gene into the DNA using a modified virus. But not only has
this method not been very successful, despite having had billions spent on it,
but with DMD there is an additional problem. The gene is so huge that it is
effectively impossible to cram it into a virus. So Professor Muntoni has
developed what he calls a "molecular patch" that knits together parts of the
gene that have been separated, and allows RNA in the muscle to "read" the faulty
DNA, and so make some of the vital dystrophin. The muscles of mice with the
damaged gene started producing dystrophin when injected with the "patch",
technically known as an "RNA oligonucleotide".

    But it's much harder correcting genetic problems in muscle than in other
parts of the body, simply because there is so much of it. Also, it is not
practical to inject every muscle. So the next step was to deliver the "patch"
via a drip into the bloodstream. This has now been done with mice, and the fact
that they naturally develop a condition almost identical to DMD increases the
chance that it will work in humans. The next stage will be to test whether the
injection has any serious side- effects in humans.

    Professor Muntoni is optimistic. "Oligonucleotides have been used in cancer
patients for years," he says, "and they are well tolerated." He believes that
real improvement will come when two or three different treatments can be used
together. "Possibly muscle stem cells and gene therapy and oligonucleotides. The
tragedy is, however, that today's patients can't wait for very long."

LOAD-DATE: December 14, 2004


                             508 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2004 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                          September 23, 2004, Thursday

SECTION: First Edition; FEATURES; Pg. 2,3

LENGTH: 1710 words

HEADLINE: THE MARVELS OF MODERN MEDICINE;
 GENE THERAPY, NANO-MEDICINE AND ROBOTIC DISPENSERS ARE BECOMING A

BYLINE: ALISON WHYTE Look into the future: pharmacists are increasingly involved
in cutting-edge medical research Photodisc

BODY:


    Whether they are working in the pharmaceutical industry or practising in a
hospital or in the community, pharmacists are key players in shaping the future
of healthcare in the UK. First and foremost, pharmacists have greater expertise
in medicines than any other health professional and are involved with medicines
at every stage of their development and use.

    Tony Moffat, Chief Scientist at the Royal Pharmaceutical Society of Great
Britain (RPSGB) says pharmacists are increasingly involved in cutting- edge
medical research. "Gene therapy is on the horizon and pharmacists will play an
active role in developing new drug delivery systems to get genes into a
patient's genome, as well as advising clinicians on the best medicines to use."

    Soon, Moffat says, the drugs we take will be tailored to suit each
individual. "We all have a different genetic make up so our bodies handle drugs
in different ways. Pharmacists will take this genetic information to choose the
right dosage of the right drug for each person." Moffat says pharmacists are
also involved in trying to combat the growing resistance to antibiotics. "One
method is to sneak drugs into cells to make new anti-viral agents. And we can
tame viruses to control infection by attacking bacteria."

    One of the most exciting areas of research is the development of nano-
medicines - the creation of structures 100 nanometres (one nanometre is a
billionth of a metre) in size or smaller - which scientists predict will soon be
applied to disease diagnosis and treatment. Professor Mike Eaton of Celltech R &
D Group plc, one of the keynote speakers at the British Pharmaceutical
Conference in Manchester this month, says there has been an exponential growth
in this field in recent years. "Nano-medicines are very specific in their mode
of action and can target key biological aspects of diseases with very low side
effects. This is very exciting area for pharmacists because we are using science
and technologies never before used in pharmacy."

    Professor Eaton says that although nano-medicines will not be on the market
until around 2015, pharmacists are needed to develop them now. "This is an
internationally competitive area in which the UK should be investing more. We
need more training as very few people have the skills required to work in
nano-medicines. There are huge challenges for pharmaceutical scientists in
formulating them."

    In the past, the career path for pharmacists working in pharmaceutical
companies led to management. Now new career pathways are opening up. Vanessa
Thorpe, senior principle scientist in pharmaceutical sciences at Pfizer's
European Research and Development Headquarters in Sandwich, Kent, says: "Being
an industry pharmacist means I get to work with the latest technologies,
processes and methods involved in bringing a new medicine to life. The best bit
of the job is knowing that I am contributing to research into new cures for
life-threatening illnesses and the ultimate reward is that you are helping
patients. The difference is that as an industry pharmacist you are doing it at
the beginning of the process instead of at the end."

    In hospitals pharmacists are also moving centre stage. Robots are already
being used to dispense medicines and this is freeing up pharmacists to engage
with patients on the wards. Hospital pharmacists are already specialising in
conditions such as diabetes or heart failure.

    David Pruce, director of practice and quality improvement at the RPSGB, says
hospital pharmacists are becoming members of the decision-making team across a
whole range of specialisms. "Future pharmacists will do less repetitive
technical tasks such as dispensing, getting much more involved with the patient
and other health care professionals."

    He explains: "When a patient is admitted to hospital the pharmacist will
take their medication history, and will see the patient every day, check their
medicines and discuss how they can be optimised with the doctor. When the
patient leaves hospital the pharmacist will make sure they know how to take
their medicines and will liaise with their GP."

    Approximately 6,000 pharmacists work in hospitals, 2,500 pharmacists are
employed in pharmaceutical companies or in industry, and 25,000 others work in
community pharmacies. In recent years the new role of primary care pharmacist
has sprung up in Primary Care Trusts (PCTs). Shailen Rao is the senior
pharmaceutical advisor at Hillingdon PCT and a member of the Primary Care
Pharmacists' Association which now has more than 900 members.

    Mr Rao has a strategic role, proactively managing the use of medicines and
supporting GP practices, community clinics and hospitals in the area. The five
practice-based pharmacists in his team look at prescribing dates and prescribing
patterns, analyse which drugs should be used and make recommendations to GPs and
the growing number of nurse prescribers.

    He says primary care pharmacists use a huge range of skills. "You need
strong clinical, analytical and people skills which is one of the real
attractions of the job. Whereas in the past, pharmacists could either do
clinical work in a hospital, get involved in business in the community or work
their way up the management ladder in industry. This job is a great blend."

    There are more than 12,000 community pharmacies which have only recently
been recognised as being a core part of the NHS. From April 2005, a new contract
for community pharmacists issued by the Government will radically alter the way
these pharmacists work. They will come out from behind the dispensing counter to
interact with the public on a much larger scale than before as part of a drive
to free up overworked GPs and provide a better health service. They will do a
lot of proactive public health work and will be encouraged to specialise.

    Jonathan Burton is one of two young pharmacists running an innovative
pharmacy on the campus of Stirling University in Scotland. They provide the
local community - 80 per cent of whom are students - with information and advice
on smoking cessation, sexual health, alcohol and clubbing drugs. They also
specialise in travel health and complementary therapies.

    The pharmacy has a "touch screen" health information point where people can
print off information, or watch videos on medical conditions. There is also a
confidential consultation area where the pharmacists counsel people about
medicines for anything from athletes foot to depression. Burton says pharmacists
are very good at explaining what things are and why they are happening.
"Generally people are very receptive. From us they get an honest opinion and
professional advice about their symptoms. Sometimes they just need reassurance,
but minor symptoms can start alarm bells ringing and we can refer them to their
GP appropriately."

    The development of so many new medicines makes the role of the pharmacist
more crucial than ever, according to Tony Moffat at the RPSGB. "Pharmacists are
already advising patients on a whole range of medicines including herbal
remedies. The role of the pharmacist is very challenging because they are
involved in scientific developments that are creating whole new areas of
practice for the benefit of the patient," he says.

    Career choices

    To qualify as a pharmacist, you must take a four-year Master of Pharmacy
degree course, followed by one year of pre-registration training and you must
pass a Royal Pharmaceutical Society exam. You can then choose to work in a
hospital, in the community or in industry

    HOSPITAL PHARMACIST

    They need good IT and communication skills. Newly qualified staff join the
NHS under the supervision of experienced staff. They can then go into management
or a clinical specialism, eventually becoming a consultant with similar status
to doctors.

    COMMUNITY PHARMACIST

    They need strong communications skills as they will be advising the public
on health issues and carrying out health promotion work. They also need to have
some business acumen as their role requires financial management and
responsibility for staff, premises and stock.

    PRIMARY CARE PHARMACIST

    At a senior level they have a strategic role, making the best use of
resources allocated for medicines and ensuring they are well spent. They also
analyse medicines and make recommendations to GPs and other prescribers.

    INDUSTRIAL PHARMACIST

    They need an interest in and experience of research and an ability to work
with scientists in other disciplines. As well as in researching and developing
medicines, industrial pharmacists can work in manufacturing and production,
analytical quality control and preparing documents for regulatory submission.

    REGULATORY PHARMACIST

    They are involved in assessing documentation submitted by companies for
authorisation to market a medicine, working for regulatory agencies set up to
protect public health. They need critical evaluation skills.

    Types of technician

    You need four GCSEs at Grade C or above, including English, science and
maths, followed by a traineeship. To qualify as a pharmacy technician you need
an NVQ level 3 in pharmacy services. The training involves practical experience
in the workplace and may involve additional study.

    There are five grades for qualified hospital pharmacy technicians. Senior
technicians can specialise in areas such as analytical control for checking the
quality of medicines, preparing radioactive materials, staff training,
information technology, supplies procurement, clinical trials or drug
information services

    HOSPITAL TECHNICIAN

    They make sure each ward has enough supplies and the correct dosages for
patients. They also check stock levels and good IT skills are required.

    COMMUNITY TECHNICIAN

    They help community pharmacists with tasks such as record-keeping, making
dilutions, stock checking and selling over the counter.

    DISPENSING ASSISTANT, DISPENSER, PHARMACY ASSISTANT OR ASSISTANT TECHNICAL
OFFICER

    They are involved in a range of support activities. From January 2005
pharmacists must ensure that dispensing/pharmacy assistants are competent to a
minimum standard equivalent to the new Pharmacy Services S/NVQ level 2
qualification.

LOAD-DATE: September 23, 2004


                             509 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2004 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                           September 20, 2004, Monday

SECTION: First Edition; FEATURES; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 629 words

HEADLINE: HEALTH CHECK

BYLINE: JEREMY LAURANCE

BODY:


    MOST PEOPLE have heard of Andrew Wakefield, the doctor from the Royal Free
Hospital in London whose research on children with bowel disease and autism
triggered the MMR scare.

    Fewer will know of Richard Horton, the editor of The Lancet, which published
the infamous paper in 1998. For six years Horton has been in the eye of the
storm as the controversy has raged around him. Now he has published a book, MMR:
Science and Fiction, containing his reflections on these troubling events.

    It is a gripping read. Having endured a storm of criticism over his decision
to publish the paper in 1998 (many held it was flawed from the start), Horton
suffered the embarrassment of being forced into a retraction in February this
year after new information came to light.

    It emerged that Wakefield had been paid by the Legal Aid Board to conduct a
pilot study on behalf of parents of allegedly MMR vaccine-damaged children,
which he had not disclosed to his co-researchers. This created a conflict of
interest that could have influenced his results. Horton describes his emotions
as he was besieged by journalists for a comment on the retraction. "I felt a
coil of suppressed frustration unwinding within me, having been pressed into a
position of extraordinary tension during the preceding six years."

    Critics will say his relief reflected the fact that he had been let off the
hook. The MMR paper had arguably done more damage than anything published in a
scientific journal in living memory. In TV interviews, Horton said that
Wakefield's work was "fatally flawed" and if he had known then what he knew now,
he would never have published it. His own three-year-old- daughter, he added,
had had MMR.

    But although highly critical of Wakefield, Horton was even more disturbed by
the way he was pilloried. One senior protagonist in the affair declared his
intention to "rub out" Wakefield and another, sipping red wine, boasted he was
"drinking his blood".

    Horton says the affair reveals a society "unable to come to terms with
dissent", and calls it a "crisis of rationality" in which we have lost the
ability to resolve disputes reasonably. And the GP and author Michael
Fitzpatrick expressed the puzzlement of many when he observed that the really
surprising feature of the scare was not how it started, but how it was sustained
for so long in the face of overwhelming evidence that it was unfounded.

    "Intelligent people chose to reject mainstream science and listen to far
less authoritative sources," he said. Why? And what can be done to tackle future
scares?

    Horton's answer is to establish a National Association of Science and Health
that would arbitrate in scientific disputes. "Only an independent body such as
this would provide the trustworthy space to debate and judge conflicting
evidence concerning mobile phones, water fluoridation, GM foods, animal
experimentation, BSE and CJD, Sars, stem-cell research, global warming, nuclear
power, public health preparations for weapons of mass destruction, animal to
human transplants, gene therapy and the links between cancer, radon and housing
design."

    Reading that list, you see the force of his call for some institution that
could offer an authoritative judgement. The Institute of Medicine in the US
fulfils something like this role. It has an eminent membership and wields huge
influence. There is no UK equivalent. But when Horton put his proposal to the
chief medical and scientific officers, there was little enthusiasm. The
Government wanted to cut quangos, not create them, he was told.

    So future scares look likely to be fought, as before, in the press, on the
airwaves and in the doctor's surgery. It does not seem a satisfactory way to
settle matters of life and death.

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 2004


                             513 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2004 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                          September 9, 2004, Thursday

SECTION: First Edition; NEWS; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 532 words

HEADLINE: STEM CELL BREAKTHROUGH ON CYSTIC FIBROSIS;
 BRITISH ASSOCIATION

BYLINE: STEVE CONNOR SCIENCE EDITOR

BODY:


    SCIENTISTS WORKING with embryonic stem cells have made a breakthrough that
could revolutionise the understanding of cystic fibrosis, the most common
inherited defect in Britain.

    The British Association's Science Festival in Exeter was told that
researchers had found a way of producing unlimited quantities of human cells
carrying the genetic mutation for the disease, which attacks the cells lining
the respiratory tract and invariably leads to premature death. Scientists
believe that the ability to produce human cells with cystic fibrosis will lead
to new drugs and treatments for an incurable disease that affects 7,500 Britons
and kills about 150 children and young adults each year.

    The research was licensed by the Human Fertilisation and Embryology
Authority, which gave permission for the group to study stem cells from spare
embryos created by IVF.

    Professor Stephen Minger of King's College London told the meeting that his
team made the breakthrough by extracting stem cells from a human embryo that
carried two copies of the most common cystic fibrosis mutation - one inherited
from each parent. "We are licensed to do screening of embryos from families for
specific genetic disorders," Professor Minger said.

    As part of the pre-implantation genetic diagnosis, a single cell is taken
from each three-day-old embryo created by IVF to test for known defects such as
cystic fibrosis. "These embryos are segregated into affected and unaffected
embryos and only theunaffected embryos are implanted or frozen. All the affected
embryos are either donated for research or destroyed," Professor Minger said.
"One of the cell lines we've established comes from an embryo that carries the
most common mutation for cystic fibrosis."

    One in 25 people carries at least one of the mutations for cystic fibrosis.
When two carriers have children there is a one in four chance that their child
will be affected.

    Until now most of the fundamental work on cystic fibrosis has involved
studying similar disorders in laboratory animals which have not been perfect
models of what happens in humans, Professor Minger said.

    "The animal models for cystic fibrosis don't fully recapitulate all aspects
of the disease. If you put this particular mutation into an animal it doesn't
cause cystic fibrosis," he said.

    "As the animal models for cystic fibrosis do not fully repeat all aspects of
the disease, having a human cell line with this genetic defect will be very
useful. Researchers will be able to use it to study how the mutation affects
cells, screen for new treatments, and also look at gene therapy."

    Professor Minger's team is now planning to adapt the technique to produce
replicating colonies, or lines, of human embryonic stem cells with other
inherited disease caused by defects in single genes, such as Huntington's
disease. Scientists hope that eventually they could be used to treat a range of
incurable illnesses by repairing damaged tissues in situ without recourse to
organ transplant.

    Britain has led the international effort in this area of medical science
since President Bush banned the creation of stem cells derived from human
embryos.

LOAD-DATE: September 9, 2004


                             515 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2004 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                           September 6, 2004, Monday

SECTION: First Edition; FEATURES; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 809 words

HEADLINE: HEALTH: JONNY'S LEGACY;
 ONE MAN'S DEATH FROM A RARE SKIN DISEASE HAS PROVIDED OTHER SUFFERERS

BYLINE: CAYTE WILLIAMS Jonny Kennedy's struggle was charted in the TV
documentary The Boy Whose Skin Fell Off'

BODY:


    It's easy to be cynical about the current glut of "real life" TV
documentaries: we get to spy on a personal tragedy, the production company gets
good ratings. However, one of these programmes has had a happy consequence, even
if the show itself had no happy ending.

    The Boy Whose Skin Fell Off aired in March this year and told the story of
Jonny Kennedy, a 36-year-old man who suffered from a rare skin condition,
dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa (EB), where his skin blistered and came away
from his body. The Boy revealed a man, constantly in pain, who refused to give
in to self-pity, and the documentary followed him in the final months of his
life and ended with his death from EB-related skin cancer on 26 September 2003.

    Viewers were so moved by his pluck that they donated in their droves. The
programme was directly responsible for raising over pounds 500,000 for the EB
charity, DebRA, and now - six months after its broadcast - a specialist EB
laboratory and ward opens today, paid for and spurred on by those donations.

    Located at Guy's and St Thomas' Hospital in London, the lab will be able to
test and diagnose skin swabs in a couple of hours (it took days before) but
researchers are also hoping for the big breakthrough - a cure.

    So what exactly is EB? A genetic disorder that affects about 5,000 sufferers
in the UK, it has three forms: Simplex, the mildest form, causing blisters on
the hands and feet, Junctional, the most grim, causes dissolution of the skin
and body linings and sufferers rarely survive infancy, while Dystrophic causes
blistering and dissolution of the skin over the whole body.

    Edna Kennedy, Jonny's mother, says she hopes the lab will find ways to
alleviate the symptoms of EB and hopes that her son's legacy will eventually
find an effective treatment.

    "When Jonny was small, no one knew how to handle the condition," she says.
"I hope the lab will be able to give people some relief from the pain, something
other than morphine. Jonny maintained that the drug didn't kill the pain, it was
just that you didn't care that you were in pain. But if they did find a cure, it
would be like winning the lottery ten times over."

    Sam Hall, 21, a graduate from Warrington, has recessive dystrophic EB. Every
morning a carer comes to her home, gives her pain-killers and a bath and
bandages her skin. The whole process takes over three hours. "I don't let EB get
me down," she says. "I drive, I go out with my friends, I try not to let it
affect me, but it's really painful."

    So what does the opening of the laboratory and ward mean to her? "It's
really good that there's somewhere now that is purely just for EB," she says.
"When I go to the doctors or casualty, people often think I've burnt myself, so
it will be great to go somewhere I won't have to keep explaining my condition.
That's always a nightmare."

    So how will the lab try to find a treatment that works? "It is hoped that
gene therapy will eventually lead to successful treatment of the disease," says
Professor John McGrath, professor of molecular dermatology at King's College,
London, and head of the new laboratory. "We're hoping we'll be successful with
ex-vivo gene therapy, where we take a small skin sample, grow it in the lab, add
an artificial copy of the missing gene - for Jonny's condition it is a gene
called Collagen VII - then graft the skin back on like a patchwork quilt. With
fine tuning, we should be able to use this treatment in two and a half years."

    Apart from finding a cure, Professor McGrath points out that the ward will
be "like a superstore for someone with EB. A patient will be able to stay
overnight in the London ward and will be able to see all the people that can
help with the condition - a dermatologist, physio, dietician, a plastic surgeon,
an occupational therapist, etc."

    The Boy Whose Skin Fell Off was originally intended for release only in the
North-east after Kennedy approached the local TV company, Yipp Films. But
Channel 4 was impressed and bought it for national scheduling. "Jonny was trying
to write a diary," says Laura Jones, spokesperson for DebRA. "As soon as he
found out he was going to die, he wanted to raise awareness so that other people
wouldn't suffer the way he did."

    The donations have kickstarted research that will require more funding, says
Professor McGrath. "Jonny's vision that things would be better for the next
generation is bearing fruit because the whole scale of EB research has been
magnified due to his legacy," he says. "Public awareness is there and we're
trying to deliver."

    Jonny Kennedy died on 26 September 2003.

    The Boy Whose Skin Fell Off' will be broadcast at the end of September with
an update from Edna Kennedy. To make a donation to DebRA or find out more about
EB call 01344 117961 or visit www.debra.org.uk

LOAD-DATE: September 6, 2004


                             522 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2004 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                             August 2, 2004, Monday

SECTION: First Edition; NEWS; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 1031 words

HEADLINE: NEW TECHNIQUE FOR SWITCHING OFF' GENES COULD END FATAL BRAIN DISEASES

BYLINE: STEVE CONNOR SCIENCE EDITOR The RNA molecule has been proven to have the
power of switching off the genes of inherited diseases; How The Independent'
broke the story in 2002

BODY:


    INCURABLE BRAIN disorders, such as Huntingdon's disease, could soon be
treated using a revolutionary technique for "switching off" disease genes.

    In a groundbreaking study, scientists have shown for the first time that it
is possible to stop a progressive brain disease in mice with a genetic technique
known as RNA interference (RNAi).

    The research raises the possibility of using the method to treat
degenerative brain conditions such as Alzheimer's. Specialists in Huntington's -
a fatal inherited disease that strikes in middle age - are particularly excited
with the results.

    The latest research was carried out by a team led by Beverly Davidson of the
University of Iowa who used RNAi to correct a genetic defect in mice suffering
from a progressive brain disorder similar to Huntington's disease in humans.

    Mice with the inherited defect who were given the RNAi treatment did not
develop the symptoms seen in untreated mice. Nor did the treated mice show any
signs of suffering from toxic side-effects, indicating that the technique is
safe.

    Dr Davidson said that the findings, published in this month's Nature
Medicine, were among the most important results of her career because they
demonstrated the possibility of directly attacking the faulty gene responsible
for Huntington's disease. "I'm extremely excited about the potential of RNAi and
cautiously optimistic about its possible use in human medicine," Dr Davidson
said.

    RNAi works by shutting down or "silencing" a disease gene while leaving
other healthy genes untouched. This makes it perfect for treating Huntington's
disease, a "dominant" genetic defect caused by a single defective version of a
gene that people inherit as two copies, one from each parent.

    Conventional gene therapy, which attempts to add a healthy version of a gene
that is missing or defective in a patient, would not work for Huntington's
because in this disease it is necessary to stop the defective version of the
gene from causing a build-up of toxic proteins in the brain. The RNAi process
used by the Iowa team specifically targeted the defective Huntington's gene by
silencing it, leaving the healthy version of the same gene to carry out its
vital duties.

    "This is the first example of targeted gene silencing of a disease gene in
the brains of live animals and it suggests that this approach may eventually be
useful for human therapies," Dr Davidson said. "We have had success in tissue
culture, but translating those ideas to animal models of disease has been a
barrier. We seem to have broken through that barrier," she said.

    Nancy Wexler of Columbia University in New York, a world authority on
Huntington's disease, said RNAi offers the most promising potential treatment
for the disease she has seen. "When I first heard of this work, it just took my
breath away. Its everything you ever wanted to hear and more," said Professor
Wexler, president of the Hereditary Disease Foundation in New York and a member
of the team that originally discovered the Huntington's gene.

    Phillip Sharp, a Nobel laureate from the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology in Boston, said Dr Davidson's findings were "striking" because they
demonstrated that RNAi may work for human patients suffering from a range of
debilitating brain diseases. "It shows that, in the context of the biology, it's
possible to do. This is a significant step, there's no doubt about it,"
Professor Sharp said.

    Dr Davidson said further animal research would be necessary to show that the
technique was safe and effective before it could be used on humans.

    The first clinical trials on Huntington's patients, or people with related
brain disorders, are likely to begin within the next five years provided there
are no signs that the technique is dangerous in humans.

    Huntington's disease is a good candidate for RNAi treatment because a
genetic test already exists to see who has inherited the condition. Secondly,
treatment could begin long before the onset of the first symptoms. The disease
affects 1 in 10,000 people. Patients suffer severe physical and psychological
degeneration.

    A DISCOVERY TO SHAKE THE MEDICAL WORLD

    THE BREAKTHROUGH that could lead to cures for inherited brain disorders such
as Huntington's is known as RNA interference, a phenomenon that has generated
huge interest since was first discovered in 1998.

    RNAi is a way of switching off or "silencing" a single harmful gene without
affecting the many thousands of other vital genes. The applications range from
switching off the genes of invading viruses to silencing the cancer- causing
genes of tumours. Now, RNAi has also proved it has a future in treating diseases
caused by inherited defects in single genes.

    In 1998, Andrew Fire, of the Carnegie Institution in Baltimore, found in
studies on the tiny nematode worm that molecules of RNA, which carry genetic
information, could be tailored to switch off certain genes. In a seminal paper
published in the journal Nature he and his colleague Craig Mello coined the
phrase "RNA interference".

    Further work showed that the interference principal appeared to be universal
to other more complex animals, and, crucially, in human cells that could in the
test tube be given immunity to invading viruses such as HIV and polio.

    The big question was whether this ability to silence genes could be
"delivered" to all the cells of the body that needed it. Beverly Davidson's work
shows that in a mammal the delivery of RNAi can work, even across the
notoriously difficult biological barrier that protects the brain. She used a
harmless carrier vehicle called adeno-associated virus to take the RNAi molecule
into the diseased cells of the brain where the defective Huntington gene needed
to be silenced. It worked.

    Phillip Sharp, a Nobel laureate at the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, said that the work has shown for the first time that RNAi can be
used to treat a disease in an animal.

    "The broader science of RNAi is spectacular. Its just absolutely
spectacular," Professor Sharp said.

    "This is not hype. The biggest science prizes in the world will fall to
RNAi."

LOAD-DATE: August 2, 2004


                             524 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2004 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            July 31, 2004, Saturday

SECTION: First Edition; SPORT; Pg. 82

LENGTH: 1365 words

HEADLINE: ATHLETICS: PROSPERING NO MORE: WHY THE TESTERS WILL CATCH THE CHEATS
AT ATHENS GAMES

BYLINE: MIKE ROWBOTTOM

BODY:


    DAVE MOORCROFT, the UK Athletics chief executive, raised eyebrows in
sporting circles this week by venturing to suggest that recent advances by the
drug testers mean the Olympic Games which get under way in less than a
fortnight's time will do so with significantly fewer doping abusers taking part
than in recent times. "I think there will be less cheats in Athens than ever,"
Moorcroft said.

    In that unfashionable belief he is not alone. According to Professor
Geoffrey Goldspink, who works at the cutting edge of the battle against doping
abuse, assisted by funding from the World Anti-Doping Agency, the advantage
which has for so long been with those trying to beat the drug testers has tilted
back.

    He knows as well as anyone the effort that has been required from himself
and his fellow researchers around the world to reach this point. He knows too
the efforts that will need to be made if the cheats are not to prosper again.
But when the athletes of the world congregate in Greece next month, Goldspink,
of the Royal Free and University College Medical School in London, believes
those who have prepared with methods beyond the rules will have reason to be
fearful.

    Since the beginning of the year it has been known that scientists had
finally devised a test for a substance which has been used by cheats for more
than 20 years - human growth hormone (HGH), which promotes muscle growth and
endurance.

    The effect could be as dramatic as the introduction in 2000 of a test for
the illegal blood-booster erythropoietin (EPO), which caused a number of
champions at the Salt Lake Winter Games of 2002 to be stripped of their medals.

    The test, which has been developed by scientists in Germany, can
differentiate between synthetic HGH that has been injected into athletes, and
that which is naturally-produced.

    The latest method circumvents the problems which delayed previous efforts,
when there was doubt over what would constitute acceptable levels of HGH in a
cross-section of competitors that ranged from 13-year-old female gymnasts to
40-year-old male rifle shooters. "It was very difficult to devise a test which
applied fairly to all of them," Goldspink said. "But now we have HGH taped."

    It is indicative of the mindset now required to counter the multi-million
dollar advances into doping abuse, however, that the Germans' breakthrough will
only be relied upon for a limited amount of time. "It is accepted that the test
will work for these Olympics, and then it will be necessary to create a new
one," Goldspink said. "But I think this time we are ahead."

    Goldspink's optimism extends to his own area of expertise, namely gene
therapy, which looks likely to take cheats and testers into a new and previously
unimagined realm of conflict.

    The reality is that this new scientific technique can transform both mice
and men. Laboratories in the United States have already produced rodents of
previously unimaginable size and power by introducing into their bodies modified
genes which trigger the natural production of human growth hormone.

    Goldspink believes it is only a matter of time before such technological
innovation is employed to further the ambitions of Olympic athletes - if indeed
it isn't already.

    But here's the bad news for prospective cheats. The authorities are ready
for them. After extended work with equipment so sensitive that it can amplify a
specific piece of DNA a million times within 20 minutes, Goldspink and his
partner Dr Steve Harridge have devised a test which will detect any kind of
tampering with genetic material.

    Whether the gene has been altered to stimulate human growth hormone, or
Insulin-like Growth Factor 1, which has a similar effect, or EPO, or even if it
has been fashioned to inhibit myostatin, the substance which normally limits
muscle growth - Goldspink's test will show it up.

    The new test is not cheap to operate, and will be used as a confirmatory
mechanism after the first wave of screening has been effected by more
traditional testing methods involving samples of urine and blood.

    Some experts in gene technology, such as the University of Pennsylvania's
Lee Sweeney, who has created a number of what are now known as the
Schwarzenegger Mice, have cast doubt on the possibility of a test becoming
effective, given that it will raise religious and ethical objections against
athletes having to provide muscle samples for biopsy.

    But Goldspink's method requires merely a drop of blood from athletes, who
are already obliged to provide both blood and urine samples at the Games by the
International Olympic Committee.

    As with the German test for injected HGH, Goldspink's test stands ready for
use immediately. How soon it would be required is open to question.

    Successful application of gene therapy would take a dedicated scientific
team working in a laboratory, something more likely to occur on a national
level. But scientists believe some manipulation could be attempted by those with
a lower level of expertise.

    "It is very difficult to say whether we can expect positives at the Athens
Games," said Goldspink, whose main work is designed to help those with
muscle-wasting illnesses such as Motor Neurone Disease. "But we will be ready. I
think by the next Games in Beijing we can be certain there will be a problem."
He added that WADA intends for samples of blood and urine to be stored for a
long period of time and submitted to new testing technologies when required. "We
can work on blood samples and cells that have been deep frozen for 20 to 30
years if necessary," he said.

    Tests for EPO and HGH were the first two priorities of WADA when it was set
up in 1999, and millions of dollars have been spent on research.

    The testers' highest profile advance in recent months, against the
previously undetectable designer steroid tetrahydrogestrinone (THG), is reported
to have stemmed from an unsolicited donation to the US Anti-Doping Agency last
summer, when an anonymous source sent them a syringe containing traces of the
substance.

    Since then, athletes such as Britain's Dwain Chambers and United States
runners such as Regina Jacobs, the world indoor 1500 metres record holder, and
Kelli White, winner of the 100 and 200m at the last World Championships, have
been banned for taking THG. And others, including the world 100m record holder
Tim Montgomery, are facing a possible life ban.

    Many observers, nevertheless, have maintained their criticism of the
anti-doping authorities, pointing out that they would not have reached this
encouraging point had they not been gifted with the evidence a year ago.

    Goldspink, however, offers a viewpoint which argues against this analysis.
"Larry Bowers, the head of USADA, is an old friend of mine, and we have sat
together on many committees," he said. "He has a very good team, and they've
obviously known about THG for some time. He has been talking about it for many
years. I think it must have been about five years."

    If Goldspink's memory serves him, the good guys have been on the case for
longer than anyone suspected. Which only serves to strengthen the hope that, as
the latest Olympics loom, those good guys may, at last, come first.

    DRUG ABUSERS ATHLETES WHO WERE CAUGHT IN THE PAST

    ANDREAS KRIEGER

    (formally known as Heidi Krieger)

    Women's 1986 European shot put champion from East Germany who had a sex
change in 1997 following male hormone usage. A victim of the East German
government's systematic provision of male hormones to both male and female
athletes.

    BEN JOHNSON

    The 100 metres champion at the 1988 Seoul Olympic Games who was stripped of
his gold medal after testing positive for the use of anabolic steroids. Johnson
tried to comeback twice after his suspension but was found guilty of further
doping violations. In 1993 he was banned for life from the sport.

    KATRIN KRABBE

    The 100 metres and 200 metres champion at the 1991 Tokyo World Championships
who received a one-year ban from the German Athletics Federation in 1992 after
she admitted taking the banned substance clenbuterol. The IAAF banned her for a
further two years in 1993.

LOAD-DATE: July 31, 2004


                             528 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2004 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                             July 26, 2004, Monday

SECTION: First Edition; NEWS; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 649 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY PROMISES A CURE FOR MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY

BYLINE: STEVE CONNOR SCIENCE EDITOR Tissues damaged by Duchenne muscular
dystrophy

BODY:


    A RADICAL treatment for muscle-wasting diseases such as muscular dystrophy
has successfully "cured" the condition in laboratory mice affected by the same
disorder that affects humans.

    Scientists used a harmless virus to infect all the muscles in the animal's
body with a healthy version of a muscle-strengthening gene that the mice had
lacked since birth.

    The researchers claim that the results are a major breakthrough in the use
of gene therapy in the treatment of a range of muscle disorders that result from
the inheritance of defective genes.

    They believe that a similar approach to treating muscular dystrophy in
humans could see the first clinical trials begin within five years, leading to a
possible cure in a decade.

    A major problem in using gene therapy for muscle-wasting diseases has been
to find a way of injecting the healthy gene into all affected muscles,
particularly those that lie deep inside the body.

    A team led by Professor Jeffrey Chamberlain of the University of Washington
in Seattle has used a virus that seems to be capable of delivering genes to the
deepest muscles without causing any apparent harm.

    The study, reported in the journal Nature Medicine, found that the muscle
cells of the affected mice began to strengthen and the improvement was seen in
every muscle sample analysed under the microscope.

    "We have a clear proof of principle that it is possible to deliver new genes
body-wide to all the striated voluntary muscles of an adult animal," Professor
Chamberlain said. "Finding a delivery method for the whole body has been a major
obstacle limiting the development of gene therapy for the muscular dystrophies,"
he said.

    The researchers genetically engineered the virus, called adeno-associated
virus, with a healthy copy of a gene that is responsible for the production of a
protein called dystrophin, which is lacking in people with muscular dystrophy.

    A genetic defect in the production of healthy dystrophin results in Duchenne
muscular dystrophy, an inherited condition affecting one in every 3,500 newborn
boys.

    Without the protein, muscles weaken significantly as the boys grow older,
leading to breathing difficulties and heart problems that usually result in them
dying in their twenties or thirties.

    The mice in the experiment are naturally affected by a similar problem as a
result of a mutation in their dystrophin gene. Professor Chamberlain attempted
to rectify this by injecting the modified virus into their bloodstream.

    "Our new work identifies for the first time a method where a new dystrophin
gene can be delivered using a safe and simple method to all of the affected
muscles of a mouse with muscular dystrophy," he said.

    Just one injection with the modified virus led to the healthy gene being
inserted into all the muscles, Professor Chamberlain said. "These muscles
include the heart, the muscles used during breathing and all the limb muscles.

    "The mice show a whole-body effect, with a dramatic improvement of their
dystrophy. No one has ever come close to doing this," he said.

    "We're not only hitting all the walking muscles but simultaneously hitting
the breathing muscles and every cell of the heart, and without any surgery. It
is a lot easier and safer than other methods," he added.

    Although further work on animals needs to be done before the technique could
be applied to humans, Professor Chamberlain believes the virus will be safe to
use on people because it cannot replicate on its own, so causing further
problems.

    However, he warned that the technique could be abused by athletes to build
muscle bulk without exercise. "This is probably the most effective method so far
for doing body building by genetic engineering," he said.

    "But it would be really easy to detect because the adeno-associated virus
would stay around for years in the body."

LOAD-DATE: July 26, 2004


                             532 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2004 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                             June 29, 2004, Tuesday

SECTION: First Edition; BUSINESS; Pg. 42

LENGTH: 823 words

HEADLINE: MARKET REPORT: KPN BUY-BACK PLAN SENDS MMO2 INTO REVERSE

BYLINE: STEPHEN FOLEY

BODY:


    THE PROSPECT of a Dutch takeover of mmO2, the mobile phone group, receded
into the middle distance yesterday after its one-time suitor, KPN, said it would
hand back EUR1bn of its cash to shareholders.

    Investors, who have pushed mmO2 shares higher this year in large measure
because of takeover hopes, sent the stock into reverse yesterday - making it one
of only a handful of FTSE 100 stocks ending the day in the red. It was down
0.25p at 93.5p.

    KPN made a pounds 9.5bn all-share offer for mmO2 back in February, and there
have been persistent hopes - despite KPN's denials - that the Dutch could
sweeten their offer by adding the cash element that would be necessary to win
the agreement of mmO2's management. At the very least, speculators have hoped
that KPN would keep the firepower to engage in a lucrative bidding war for the
UK company, should it receive a bid from elsewhere. However, yesterday KPN
delighted the Amsterdam stock exchange with plans to return a further EUR1bn
through a share buy-back, much more than investors had been expecting. It is
also spending its cash to buy back bonds.

    The disappointment meant mmO2 was the most heavily traded FTSE 100 share
after Vodafone, its bigger rival, whose shares were 0.25p higher at 123.5p.
There was also very strong institutional buying of mmO2's former parent, BT
Group. Its shares were up 4.25p at 197.75p amid gathering optimism over current
trading. Broadband take-up and a promised fightback against the alternative
carriers, ought to mean a second quarter of better-than- feared revenues,
investors were betting.

    There was optimism all round yesterday, in fact. Traders were ready to take
this week's US interest rate rise on the chin and, with Wall Street rebounding
from Friday's losses, the FTSE 100 moved decisively upwards, closing 24.6 points
better at 4,518.7. Alongside rising interest rates, the high oil price has also
been stoking fears the economic recovery will stall. So the sharp fall in the
price of crude yesterday - on restored exports from Iraq and the early handover
of power in the country - was greeted warmly.

    Investors went shopping for aviation industry shares as a result of falling
fuel costs. British Airways, which had been forced to put a supplement on ticket
prices to make up for the oil price spike, saw its shares jump 6.25p to 272.5p.
BAE Systems, the co-owner of Airbus, was 4p better at 209.75p while Smiths
Group, the aircraft maintenance group, was 12.5p firmer at 733p. Rolls-Royce,
the engines maker, rose 4.75p to 246.75 - its best level in three years - on
hopes that improved conditions in the airline industry will feed through to new
orders. The company was also boosted by comments from UBS, a long-time bear of
the stock, that the pension fund deficit may not be as crippling as once feared,
and an admission that profits will rebound more strongly than the broker had
been expecting.

    The share trading shenanigans around Philip Green's bid for Marks & Spencer
threatened to engulf senior managers at two other big companies, and sent their
shares lower. Icap - whose chairman, Michael Spencer, bought M&S shares after
speaking to Stuart Rose - fell 14.75p to 263p, while Bradford & Bingley - the
building society whose finance director didn't buy M&S shares after talking to
Mr Rose but who claims he told her he would soon be running the company - was
off 1.75p at 275.5p.

    Vague talk of a management buy-out pushed Matalan, the discount retailer,
1.75p higher to 209p. But MFI Furniture, where similar gossip has simmered for a
while, was off 2p at 154p, despite talk of a broker upgrade.

    Cambridge Silicon Radio is proving to be one of the best performing shares
to have joined the stock market in the spring deluge. Floated at 200p, the
company - whose Bluetooth technology helps mobile devices talk to each other -
now stand at 410p, up 13p yesterday. CSR was heavily over- subscribed when it
came to market and there was a scurrilous rumour doing the rounds that fund
managers were threatened with getting a reduced allocation of CSR shares if they
didn't also subscribe to Ark Therapeutics, a biotech float that CSFB, the pair's
broker, had much more trouble getting away. Ark shares sunk almost immediately
on listing and are still languishing at 100.5p, down a penny yesterday, compared
to their float price of 133p. Although the company has published some positive
clinical data on its gene therapy products in recent weeks, investors are
fearful of a big share placing by Ark's venture capital backers when lock-ins
expire.

    Yesterday's new arrivals included Nutrinnovator, which has developed a range
of health foods including snack bars and cola. Oriel Securities raised it pounds
1.4m at 53p-a-share, and the stock closed at 58.5p. Oriel was also behind Brady,
a commodities trading software company, which raised pounds 2.5m at 81p and saw
its shares nudged to 82.5p.

LOAD-DATE: June 29, 2004


                             537 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2004 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                             June 8, 2004, Tuesday

SECTION: Final Edition; FEATURES; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 1186 words

HEADLINE: THE A TO Z OF ALICE;
 WHEN HIS MUSICIAN SISTER DIED FROM CYSTIC FIBROSIS, LUKE MARTINEAU

BYLINE: CLARE DWYER HOGG Luke Martineau's alphabet picture of his sister Alice
on the roof (above); brother and sister together shortly before her death
(below)

BODY:


    Alice Martineau would not allow the word "brave" to be used to describe her.
She hated it. It was up there with spiders on her list of dislikes. "I
absolutely hate being called brave," she said in the BBC documentary, The Nine
Lives of Alice Martineau, made about her last year. "I'm not." She looks at the
camera straight on, steely eyed. "I'm not," she repeats. Throughout the
programme, her brother Luke and her voice coach call her brave "just to annoy
her".

    Despite the mirth, there were very serious reasons why someone might have
thought of describing Alice Martineau as such. She had cystic fibrosis - an
illness diagnosed since birth, and a condition that was rapidly worsening. For
those unaccustomed to the signs and symptoms of cystic fibrosis, outward
appearances mean little. In the documentary, Alice, then 30, looks like a
carefree young woman who's having fun. A part-time model, a graduate (with a
first-class degree), and a Sony-signed musician with an album (Daydreams) under
her belt, she speaks with confidence about her life and plans. With her large,
cat-like eyes flickering with mischief, she talks about writing music,
collaborating with the boy band Blue, and of how Robbie Williams came to her
first gig. There doesn't seem to be any reason why she shouldn't achieve
whatever she sets her mind to.

    But appearances can be deceptive. Her eyes belie the truth. Invisible to the
casual observer, her body is racked with pain, and pumped with a list of drugs
longer than you'd think any body could take.

    Her older brother Luke, a painter, features in the documentary, too. He knew
first-hand what Alice was dealing with before she died in March last year.
Because cystic fibrosis is a degenerative disease that attacks the lungs, Alice
was permanently on oxygen: she had barely a quarter of her lung capacity because
of multiple biopsies, and the parts of her lungs that were still intact were
ravaged with infection.

    "Grief is a strange thing," he says of the loss of his sister. "It can zap
you between the eyes when you're listening to a piece of music, and you can feel
overwhelmed, burst into tears and lose it completely. I watched the film about
Alice last night for the first time since she died. I expected to find it hard,
but I didn't find it as hard as I thought it would be. So you never quite know."

    The Martineau family and Alice's friends have set up the Alice Martineau
Appeal, in order to raise money for the Cystic Fibrosis Trust. Two thirds of the
trust's funds go towards gene therapies which, one day, will ensure that
sufferers enjoy a normal lifespan.

    "Until now, the only way they've been able to treat cystic fibrosis is with
antibiotics," says Luke, "just treating the symptoms. Now, they're developing
drugs in mist form that you inhale. The mist contains healthy copies of the gene
that is defective. The healthy gene copies itself into the lung temporarily, so
that while you're dosed up with it, your lungs are healthy lungs."

    He shakes his head, and we go upstairs, past children's toys and small socks
(he and his wife have a toddler and a baby) and into his studio. It is filled
with portraits of Alice - 26, to be precise. One for every letter in the
alphabet, complete with a word that describes her. S is for Star. W is for Wins
at Scrabble (a claim that Luke used to vehemently dispute with her). G is for
Graceful (Luke's daughter is called Grace, so this one is particularly poignant
for him). The paintings represent Luke's need to commemorate his sister's life
force before it's too late.

    "After Alice died, we had a big get-together with all her friends. Everyone
was saying that we should do an appeal," he says. "We thought we could do a pop
concert, but although Alice had achieved some amazing things, she wasn't Dido.
We couldn't expect Bono and Elton to turn up." He grins. "That was really tough.
I was getting frustrated and worried that we were running out of time. So I
dropped everything and started to paint. I painted S - Star first, and worked
for six weeks non-stop."

    The paintings will be auctioned at a launch event today, which would have
been Alice's 32nd birthday. "I'm going to miss some of these," he says, looking
around. "There's a huge amount attached to this for me - it's Alice, and also
it's my work. It couldn't be more about me, and my world, and my life, so it is
kind of scary, really. It is quite loaded."

    He is concerned lest people would think that the portraits are downbeat, or
valedictory. "It's about celebrating Alice as someone who goes on in people's
lives, being relevant - she's always going to be relevant," he says.

    His favourite portrait is Q - Queen of Pop - which looks a little Warhol-
esque. "As a whole, I want the show to feel iconographic. I think Alice has
become, in a way, an icon. For anyone with cystic fibrosis, she is. I'm playing
on that. And repeating the image, repeating the profile, just trying to ram it
home. She was a steadfast character. Stubborn."

    The sale will be presided over by a auctioneer from Sotheby's ("A
professional auctioneer should get people bidding properly," Luke laughs), and
among the guests will be Simon Cowell and the Duchess of York, who is a patron
of the charity. "She chose us," he says. "Alice's boyfriend, Al, has a friend
who was sitting next to the Duchess at some do, and they were chatting about
Al's bereavement. She said, I want his number. I want to help him'." And she
did.

    "Luckily, Al didn't think it was a wind-up, because he's a real wind- up
person," Luke laughs. "She wanted to do everything that she could to make Alice
number one, to use her words. She genuinely cares. I think she's an emotional
person, emotionally driven. When she says she wants to do something, she means
it."

    Luke finds the whole thing rather extraordinary. "I have imaginary chats
with Alice a lot, and I say, look what you've done to my life!" In some ways,
he's not that surprised. In her own lifetime, Alice did a lot of things that
seemed entirely unlikely from the outset. A career in pop, for instance, isn't
an easy route for anyone - notwithstanding breathing difficulties and severe
illness. But, just like she wrote her songs to give plenty of space to take
breaths, she fitted whatever she wanted to do into the rhythms that her body
dictated.

    The phone rings, and Luke breaks off from the conversation to answer it.
It's Charlotte Walker, one of Alice's best friends, who is acting as treasurer
for the appeal. Charlotte went to primary school with Alice, and used to hold
her hand during sports-day races so that Alice, who clearly didn't have the lung
capacity to run as fast as her peers, would never be last. She's calling to tell
Luke that almost all of the 300 tickets have been sold.

    Alice might be gone, but she has certainly left a legacy. And although she
didn't like being described as brave, she didn't say anything about the word
"inspirational".

    For more information about the Alice Martineau Appeal and the Cystic
Fibrosis Trust, consult www.cftrust.org.uk/aliceappeal

LOAD-DATE: June 8, 2004


                             550 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2004 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            March 4, 2004, Thursday

SECTION: First Edition; BUSINESS; Pg. 42

LENGTH: 215 words

HEADLINE: THE INVESTMENT COLUMN: OXFORD BIOMEDICA HAS PRESCRIPTION TO STRIKE
GOLD

BYLINE: EDITED BY STEPHEN FOLEY

BODY:


    IT IS a dream of every company manager: instead of having to find the cash
to develop a potential multi-million pound bestselling product, along comes a
charity or government to pay the investment for you.

    The dream has come true not once, but repeatedly for Alan Kingsman, chief
executive of Oxford BioMedica. The company is working on science so exciting
that Cancer Research UK and the US National Cancer Institute are bankrolling big
human trials of TroVax, a vaccine for colorectal and breast cancer. They don't
want a thing in return, not even royalties on any product. "They just want to
cure cancer," says Professor Kingsman.

    The things that have drawn these organisations to OXB might scare some
investors away: the science is revolutionary and unproven. There might be
nothing here at the end of the day. But if it does get proven, OXB could be
sitting on a goldmine.

    The company, which had pounds 31.8m in the bank at the end of 2003, will
spend up to pounds 12m of its own cash a year to fund other trials of TroVax and
MetXia, a gene therapy cancer treatment. Many programmes are behind schedule,
but the breadth of the portfolio means OXB is at least a prolific generator of
news, which ultimately drives share prices in this highly speculative sector.

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 2004


                             553 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2004 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                          February 18, 2004, Wednesday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 42

LENGTH: 290 words

HEADLINE: THE INVESTMENT COLUMN: IT COULD BE WORTH GETTING ABOARD ARK

BYLINE: EDITED BY STEPHEN FOLEY

BODY:


    ARK THERAPEUTICS failed to live up to its name in 2002: it didn't float.
This time around, the biotech group looks like being the first in three years to
prise open the sector's "funding window" and raise pounds 55m with an initial
public offering.

    In the UK, the biotech sector is down there with mining exploration as a
speculative investment. These are often tiny companies with no revenues, just
talented scientists hoping to strike gold with a new life-saving or improving
drug.

    Ark is better than many. It has four products in or ready for the crucial
last stage of human trials. It thinks it has hit a rich seam in vascular
medicine (where it has developed a wound dressing in the shape of a boot that
might one day be proven to improve leg ulcer healing times) and in cancer (where
tentative trials show it may slow brain tumour growth by injecting the area with
a genetically-modified virus).

    The success of one of its gene therapy products could turn Ark profitable,
but there are no such products available in the West and hiccups in this highly
innovative programme would delay or even scupper launches optimistically slated
for 2007. Sceptics argue that Ark's private equity backers are too eager to cash
in and that they are pushing for a value that doesn't adequately reflect these
risks. Its brokers appear to have pursuaded enough people, but private investors
must remember they could lose the lot.

    Where the shares go after flotation depends on sentiment towards the sector,
but this is picking up in the US and Ark itself could buoy UK investor
confidence if it is successful. On balance, it looks like there may be a buck or
two to be made by snapping up the shares when they appear next month.

LOAD-DATE: February 18, 2004


                             556 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2004 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                           February 17, 2004, Tuesday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 453 words

HEADLINE: AMERICAN ASSOCIATION FOR SCIENCE: GENE THERAPY COULD HELP ATHLETES
CHEAT

BYLINE: STEVE CONNOR SCIENCE EDITOR, IN SEATTLE Athletes could use gene therapy
to enhance their performance Nick Wilson/Getty

BODY:


    SPORTSMEN AND women could soon be using undetectable genetic enhancement
techniques to bypass the increasingly strict doping rules in world sport, it was
claimed yesterday.

    Unscrupulous athletes would be able to apply the latest scientific advances
illicitly to enhance their performance with gene therapy injections to make
their muscles bigger and stronger than those who rely on physical training
alone. Lee Sweeney from the University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia has
demonstrated that the use of the injections in mice can improve muscle strength
by up to 30 per cent without any additional exercise.

    When he carried out similar experiments on rats, the injected muscle became
almost twice as strong as the uninjected muscle - suggesting that the genetic
enhancement of athletes, on top of training, would prove unbeatable.

    Dr Sweeney said it was inevitable that someone would try the same on
athletes in the hope of producing a doping method that cannot be detected by any
test available today.

    He told the American Association for the Advancement of Science in Seattle:
"This is but one example of a number of potential gene therapies that are being
developed with disease treatment as the goal, but if given to a healthy
individual would provide genetic enhancement of some trait. As these
developments go forward, they inevitably will find their way into the healthy
population. The prospects are especially high that muscle- directed gene
transfer will be used by the athletic community for performance enhancement,
just as many drugs are used and abused today."

    The technique uses a gene for insulin-like growth factor which when injected
with a virus into a muscle becomes incorporated into the genes of the muscle
tissue causing them to grow. In medicine the technique could prove useful in
treating a range of muscle-wasting diseases, such as muscular dystrophy, and it
could also be used to deal with muscle weakness in old people. One injection of
the genes for the growth factor lasted a lifetime and older animals did not
experience the muscle decline normally seen in ageing animals, including humans.

    "The fact that we had seen not only beneficial effects in old animals and
animals with muscle disease, but also muscle growth in young sedentary animals,
suggested the possibility that such a treatment would lead to genetic
enhancement of muscle performance," he said.

    Dr Sweeney said it was unclear what the risks could be and added that they
may include increased heart problems and possibly cancer. "In many cases,
policing such abuse in the sports community will be much more difficult than in
the case of drugs, since detection will be difficult," he said.

LOAD-DATE: February 17, 2004


                             559 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2004 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                           February 5, 2004, Thursday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 490 words

HEADLINE: SCIENTISTS COULD MAKE GM BEEF WITH HEALTHY FISH OILS

BYLINE: STEVE CONNOR SCIENCE EDITOR Fish contains the healthy Omega-3 fatty
acid; Harvard scientists believe they could breed cows that secrete the healthy
acid in their muscles David Rose

BODY:


    IT SOUNDS like a culinary catastrophe but scientists have shown that it may
soon be possible to breed beef cattle whose meat is enriched with the healthy
properties of fish oil.

    The researchers have shown that it is possible to create genetically
modified (GM) mammals that secrete the Omega-3 constituent of fish oil in their
muscles.

    Although the work has so far been carried out only on laboratory mice, the
Harvard University scientists believe it is just a matter of time before a
similar attempt is made on farm livestock.

    Jing Kang, the leader of the research team from Harvard and the
Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston, said that mammals cannot normally make
their own Omega-3 fatty acid which is found in abundance in fish oil and is
known to prevent heart disease and furred-up arteries.

    However, when the research team inserted a gene into mouse embryos for an
enzyme that can help to synthesise Omega-3, the researchers found abundant
amounts of Omega-3 in muscle tissues and relatively low amounts of the less
beneficial Omega-6 fatty acid - which the enzyme converts into Omega- 3.

    The researchers wrote in the journal Nature: "The obvious follow-up would be
to create livestock animals and see if their tissues also contain Omega-3s," Dr
Kang said.

    Some domestic livestock, such as laying hens, are already fed a diet rich in
fish oils in the hope of boosting levels of Omega-3 in farm products.

    But the scientists believe a that a GM alternative could be more effective.
Mr Kang said that meat, milk or eggs from the GM animals will not taste fishy
because Omega-3 does not have a taste. "Correction of the usually Omega-3
deficient western diet has become a key step towards reducing the risk of
several modern diseases," Dr Kang said. The enzyme gene used in the study was
derived from a nematode worm.

    The gene, called fat-1, helped to convert Omega-6 fatty acid into Omega- 3
and causes no apparent harm to the laboratory mice, the researchers said.

    "Another possibility to explore would be gene therapy to introduce fat- 1
directly into human tissues," he added. That idea could lead to people being
able to manufacture their own Omega-3 internally.

    Lord Melchett, policy director of the Soil Association, which certifies
organic farmers, dismissed the idea that the research would lead to GM farm
livestock that would benefit human health.

    "We know that all or nearly all such claims turn out to be rubbish," Lord
Melchett said. "There is a widespread view that GM farm animals are going to be
even less acceptable to the public than GM crops."

    Joyce d'Silva, of Compassion in World Farming, said the idea of creating GM
livestock enriched with Omega-3 is an appalling prospect. "Omega-3 is easily
obtained from plant sources such as rape oil. GM and cloned farm animals often
suffer from a range of defects, such as malformed limbs or organs," Ms D'Silva
said.

LOAD-DATE: February 5, 2004


                             567 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2003 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                          November 26, 2003, Wednesday

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 115 words

HEADLINE: RADIO: PICK OF THE DAY

BYLINE: FIONA STURGES

BODY:


    Frontiers (9pm R4)

    Three years ago, a French medical team found that a child with severe
combined immunodeficiency syndrome showed mprovement after gene therapy, but two
years later, the same team revealed that another patient had developed a
leukemia-like disorder after treatment. As a result, gene therapy trials, both
in America and Europe, were suspended. In an investigation into the current
state of the medical procedure, Peter Evans (above) talks to the original team
in Paris and visits Great Ormond Street, where doctors are continuing to develop
genetic treatments. Despite the recent setbacks, researchers hope that gene
therapy technology will soon be widespread.

LOAD-DATE: November 26, 2003


                             575 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2003 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                          October 22, 2003, Wednesday

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 663 words

HEADLINE: SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY: THE SCIENTIFIC METHOD;
  EMPHASISING THE ETHICS OF DESIGNER BABIES IS A WAY OF AVOIDING THE

BYLINE: LEWIS WOLPERT

BODY:


    The celebrations for the 50th anniversary of the discovery of the beautiful
double helical structure of DNA were both very interesting and fun. I, for
example, ended up dancing "Strip the Willow" in Northumberland with Jim Watson.
But one must bear in mind that DNA is really boring compared with the proteins
for which the DNA provides the code. DNA is passive, while proteins are the
wizards of cell life, and life in general.

    During the celebrations there arose, as you would have expected, discussions
on the supposedly ethical issues associated with the use of DNA in relation to
medical treatments, but mainly in relation to determining what sort of children
we might have, or even choose to have. Are there really ethical issues involved?
This becomes particularly relevant as the Government is taking a positive
approach to genetics and gene therapy in relation to health.

    Many of our illnesses, from mental disorders to cancer, are affected by
proteins and thus by genes. There are several thousand diseases, including
cystic fibrosis and muscular dystrophy, that are caused by errors in single
genes. However, most genetic contributions to both health and ill-health involve
multiple genes, probably hundreds. Identifying these genes, even though we have
the human genome, is very difficult. I am thus nervous that gene therapy may be
being oversold by the Government: the claim that it will make an enormous
difference to the way it delivers healthcare seems at this stage to be no more
than hype. Not only have the relevant genes to be identified, but they have also
to be inserted into the right cells and, subsequently, to function properly; as
yet, this has proved to be extremely difficult - cystic fibrosis has not yet
been cured by gene therapy. But with well-funded research, the long-term future
is promising. And the possible ethical issues related to gene therapy seem to
have largely disappeared, helped by the Government's assurance that genetic
knowledge will not be used to discriminate against individuals in relation, for
example, to insurance.

    But are there any important ethical issues with respect to designer babies
to which we have to address ourselves? If there are, it is hard to see what they
are. What possible argument from ethics could be used against prenatal diagnosis
of an embryo obtained by IVF, if the diagnosis prevents the implantation of
embryos with defective genes? I know that some people object, but there is no
evidence that the early embryo is a person. This idea is a relatively recent
one, with religious underpinning but with neither argument nor evidence. The
Magisterium of the Catholic Church demands that the embryo be respected from the
first instance. But what has to be considered in every case is the child and its
future wellbeing, and not to do so is totally lacking in respect. Who, for
example, is being harmed in all the recent fuss about choosing an embryo with
the right genes to help a sibling? Both children will certainly be very well
cared for. And it is care of the child that matters.

    There are fears that those who have designer babies - choosing children with
particular genes that code for hair colour or height, perhaps - will be part of
a superclass and increase the inequalities in our society. But will it really
make more difference than currently exists between the rich and poor, the former
giving their children all sorts of advantages? Emphasising the ethics of
designer babies is a way of avoiding the very real problem that about one in 10
of all children suffers some sort of abuse, and thousands are registered as
requiring special care because of their dangerous parents. Child neglect is a
major problem which has been severely neglected in all the ethical discussions,
and it raises a real question as to whether everyone and anyone has the right to
bear children.

    Lewis Wolpert is professor of biology as applied to medicine at University
College, London

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 2003


                             578 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2003 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                           October 11, 2003, Saturday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 680 words

HEADLINE: INVESTMENT: THE PRIVATE INVESTOR - I'VE ACHIEVED MY GOAL AT MAN
UNITED. SO WHAT ABOUT THE PROFIT?'

BYLINE: SEAN O'GRADY Warren Buffett says do not invest in anything you do not
understand

BODY:


    IT'S NICE to be right, but it is strange to be even righter than you thought
you were. Last week you may recall I wrote about the recent dramatic turn of
events at Manchester United. I was principally concerned, of course, with the
recent rapid rise in the share price and the swirl of speculation about the
future of the company.

    I regretted not following my instincts and buying the shares this year,
when, I think, they languished at 100p or so. By last week that had just about
doubled, then hit 250p before dropping back to 225p by the end of the week. At
which point, all the shares in Manchester United I've purchased over the past
few years are in the money.

    Trebles all round? Well, that's the funny thing about paper profits; you
just can't spend them down the pub, or anywhere else. So the question is, what
next? Leaving the temporary difficulties of Rio Ferdinand aside for a moment,
the outcome is by no means clear. I shall sit tight for now.

    Another little conundrum I have had to solve is what to do about Oxford
Biomedica's rights issue. I bought into this particular growth story seven years
ago, believing it was on the verge of a cure for cancer, and it has not yet
proved to be a profitable venture.

    Not the least reason for this is the countless cash calls the company makes
on its shareholders. Now is not an especially good time to be tapping the market
for funds, and dispirited Oxford Biomedica shareholders are not the most
enthusiastic souls.

    So here we go again, and this time we shareholders are being offered 27 new
shares for every 50 we own. At present, Biomedica shares stand at 20p, just
above the theoretical ex- rights price of 17p. There are positive and negative
sides. First, the pounds 22.1m the company hopes to raise would help it make
more ground with its cancer and neurotherapy drugs, and will strengthen its
bargaining position when negotiating licensing agreements.

    But analysts rightly point out the high underwriting costs of pounds 1.7m,
or almost 8 per cent of the money being raised. The really negative point is
what Alan Kingsman, the chief executive, said, that without the issue the
company's cash would run out early in 2005.

    The legendary investor, Warren Buffet, always said you shouldn't invest in
anything you don't understand, and my venture into biotechnology is a
spectacular defiance of those wise words. The company says its products "use
genes as the mediators of a therapeutic effect and/or immune response.

    "The company's gene therapy products deliver therapeutic molecules in vivo,
whilst its gene-based immunotherapy products deliver genes that recruit the
patient's immune system to mediate a therapeutic effect. The genes are delivered
by the company's highly engineered viruses or cells". Actually, although there
are an awful lot of big words there, I think I grasp what they're trying to do.
I just feel in a very exposed position about judging whether they can deliver.
It isn't a huge amount of money though, so I may go along with this call.

    More encouraging has been the progress of Abbey National. With much of the
rest of the market, it hit a nadir in March at almost 300p, but has bounced back
to about 530p.

    Far off its peak of 1450p, but welcome relief nonetheless from some
appalling self-inflicted wounds. I notice it has been treated to one of those
slightly absurd makeovers high street banks feel themselves bound to go through
every so often. I took my dividend this time in the form of an "alternative", in
other words used it to buy more shares in Abbey through its dividend
reinvestment plan (or Drip).

    Dividend scrip issues have become rare nowadays and while bigger FTSE100
concerns such as Abbey or Rolls-Royce offer scrips or drips, lots of smaller but
still substantial concerns - the likes of Tate & Lyle, say - don't seem to want
to do so.

    It's a pity, because it does offer a very neat way of making the magic of
compound interest work. They can't be that expensive to administer. Just a
thought.

    s.o'grady@independent.co.uk

LOAD-DATE: October 11, 2003


                             580 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2003 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                           October 8, 2003, Wednesday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 657 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY COULD BE CURE FOR CHILDHOOD BLINDNESS

BYLINE: STEVE CONNOR

BODY:


    A REVOLUTIONARY technique for inserting healthy genes into unhealthy organs
is to be extended to treat childhood blindness and Parkinson's disease.

    British scientists are to pioneer the development of gene therapy for
chronic and incurable conditions by announcing the first clinical trials on the
eye and brain beginning next year.

    Professor Robin Ali, head of the gene therapy team at the Institute of
Ophthalmology, University College London, said animal tests had shown the
approach could lead to an effective treatment for inherited blindness in
children and visual deterioration in the elderly.

    "There are lots of disorders of the eye that may be very amenable to this
sort of novel treatment. There are a lot of eye diseases at present that are not
effectively treated, or not treated at all," Professor Ali said. "We and a
number of groups around the world have demonstrated proof of principle in a
range of animals models for a variety of conditions. So we are now at the stage
of seriously considering clinical trials."

    A second team of scientists is preparing for gene therapy on patients
suffering from advanced Parkinson's disease, which is caused by the degeneration
of cells in the brain that produce the neurotransmitter dopamine.

    Professor Alan Kingsman of Oxford University said he hoped to recruit 10
patients with an advanced disease for a trial to begin early next year. He has
set up company called Oxford Biomedica to develop the research. "We have a
product that turns cells that don't make dopamine into cells that do. You simply
recreate the factory for dopamine. It works extremely well in animal models,"
Professor Kingsman said.

    Gene therapy involves the creation of an artificial human gene that is
inserted into the cells of the body by a "vector", which is usually a
genetically engineered virus that has been rendered safe. "In Parkinson's, you
effectively lose your dopamine factory. What you can do with gene therapy is
essentially to deliver the genes that programme cells to make dopamine," he
said.

    Although initial gene therapy trials on other disorders proved unsuccessful,
scientists have recently announced that they have worked well in treating some
conditions, notably in babies born with defective immune systems. Now medical
researchers want to extend the technique to include not just inherited diseases
caused by defective genes, but disorders of later life that have proved
difficult to treat by more conventional approaches.

    Professor Ali said two trials were being planned, one to treat age-related
macular degeneration, when the growth of blood vessels in the eye causes gradual
blindness in the over-60s, and inherited blindness in children caused by a
defect in a gene resulting in retinitis pigmentosa.

    "In the main, to treat the inherited disorder we need to correct the
underlying genetic defect, in the case of retinitis pigmentosa, perhaps putting
the missing gene back into the photoreceptor cell," Professor Ali said. "Whereas
in the case of more complex diseases of the elderly, the approach is usually to
try to ameliorate some prominent feature of the disease without treating the
underlying genetic defect."

    "The major prerequisites for clinical trials have now been established so we
can achieve very efficient gene transfer to the eye and achieve life-long gene
expression without doing anything toxic. The potential outcome - and we'll have
to wait to see whether it is borne out - would be improved night vision and
improved peripheral vision. We would be able to determine this very quickly,
within a few weeks of treatment."

    Professor Ali said a key consideration was to assess the potential benefits
of gene therapy compared with the risk of a child losing what little vision he
or she may have.

    "There is no way we'd undertake a clinical trial if we thought we were
seriously risking a child's residual sight," he said.

LOAD-DATE: October 8, 2003


                             585 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2003 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                          September 20, 2003, Saturday

SECTION: FEATURES

LENGTH: 1676 words

HEADLINE: BOOKS INTERVIEW: SUSAN GREENFIELD - A MIND OF HER OWN;
 SUSAN GREENFIELD, PIONEERING GUIDE TO THE BRAIN, WORRIES THAT NEW

BYLINE: GAIL VINES

BODY:


    ALTHOUGH NOT quite a household name, perhaps, Susan Greenfield is a star
media boffin. She's one of a handful of British scientists who seem to enjoy
writing accessible books about science. Braving academic disdain, she writes
newspaper columns and presents TV documentaries as well. She has even itemised
the contents of her handbag at the behest of an inquiring journalist. With a
winning smile and quick-fire verbal agility, Greenfield is at home in the
celebrity jungle of media and politics.

    This year, the Daily Mail ranked her among its "100 most influential women
in Britain", while in 2000 The Observer voted her Woman of the Year. Two years
ago, Tony Blair elevated her to the House of Lords: Baroness Greenfield. She's
pro-GM food, by the way, and against the decriminalisation of cannabis. On a
wide range of subjects, Susan Greenfield has no doubt of her own mind.

    Which brings us to the heart of her latest book, Tomorrow's People: how
21st-century technology is changing the way we think and feel (Allen Lane,
pounds 20). Fiction, albeit science fiction, was what she wanted to write. One
Christmas, on a quiet beach holiday in the Caribbean, she set out to write a
racy thriller, a page-turning novel featuring "a science-starlet", "a brilliant
and beautiful heroine, a female neuroscientist ... ". Disarmingly, Greenfield
says she soon abandoned the attempt, judging her narrative pedestrian, her
characters cliched and her dialogue wooden. Meet this scientist and you soon
discover that self-revelation is Greenfield's secret weapon. Openness,
outspokenness and sheer self-belief can be highly attractive characteristics.

    So Tomorrow's People is, for its author, the next best thing to fiction; an
imaginative leap into what the future might be, given a range of advances in IT,
genetics, reproduction and nanotechnology. Futurology has its dangers, though.
Readers of this book must be willing to journey along the paths she maps out,
with signposts provided by her researcher, Milla Harrison.

    In Greenfield's vision, the future is peopled by a decidedly dreary lot.
They spend more time conversing with household appliances than with one another.
Their loos tell them how they're feeling; their fridges tell them what to eat.
At least washing machines are not in on the conversation, as clothes clean
themselves. (Bacteria embedded in the fabric eat the dirt.)

    Tomorrow's people reproduce via test tubes, eat GM food, and go to work on
the web. Illness and disability are well-nigh banished by designer embryos,
"neutraceutical" food designed to contain every nutrient known to science, and
miraculous medical interventions such as cyber-prostheses and gene therapy.

    But futuristic lifestyle scenarios are not really what interest Greenfield.
Instead, she's concerned about how this technology is changing the way we think
and feel. And no wonder. Most of the time, the denizens of her dystopia are
either stoned out of their minds or away with the cyber-fairies. They should get
out more, but of course in this hi-tech world there's no reason to.

    Forget wholesome walks in the country; nature doesn't feature. When I
mention this, Greenfield laughs and says that, "I am a Londoner, I was born a
Londoner, and I think I'm finally old enough and sufficiently confident to stand
up and say unflinchingly, I'm an urban person. I hate gardening and cooking, but
I love shopping, I love wine bars, the diversity and buzz of city life and
things to do."

    But even metropolitan attractions are off the agenda for tomorrow's people.
Cyber-shopping satisfies every material desire, while cyber-sex does for the
rest. Even children are expected to bend genders and try every conceivable
orientation in virtual reality: "Hetero-, bi- and homosexual boundaries have
long been obsolete, as has the old concept of the family."

    Yet it's not the prospect of sexual experimentation or post-family life that
worries Greenfield, but something else: what she perceives as the threat to the
private, solitary individual. In 2050, with everyone wired to everyone else,
individual identity has become submerged within a vast public collective.
Wittgensteinians might argue that human subjectivity has never been coherently
conceptualised as a private affair, but Greenfield's stab at explaining
consciousness, The Private Life of the Brain, makes a virtue of distinctive
inner worlds. So the stakes are high.

    In her universally IT-connected world, "we would no longer have private
thoughts; rather, we would effectively be part of a larger network, a mere node
in a thinking, conscious system". With the loss of private thoughts, Greenfield
believes, go creativity, originality, and the wellsprings of human achievement.
The antidote to terrorism and fundamentalist cults, she says, is to foster
private lives. It's as though the solution to Osama bin Laden is suburbia.

    If there's a whiff of Cold War rhetoric here, her intellectual stance
probably reflects more straightforwardly the robust mindset of a self- made
woman. She admires the radical individualism of the existentialists, and would
most like a time machine to take her back to Left-Bank Paris of the 1950s. The
daughter of a Jewish electrician and a Gentile dancer, she says she has always
been aware that she doesn't fit easily into standard categories.

    A working-class child sent to an academic, middle-class school, and shored
up always by the unwavering support of her mother, Susan won a place at Oxford
to read Greats, before switching to psychology. Now a businesswoman (a founding
director of BrainBoost Ltd), an Oxford don and director of the Royal
Institution, she can justifiably feel well-placed to advise on the secrets of
success. "Just be yourself," she tells first-year Oxford undergraduates who are
reeling from the discovery that they are no longer the brightest in the class.

    It's good advice, yet in some ways at odds with Greenfield's central
message. For although she speaks strongly of the importance of tolerance and
openness to difference, she doesn't really want everyone to do whatever they
like. Rather, she wants them to be like her, to improve themselves, to work
hard, to reach goals. Stark dualities run through her book: good vs bad; private
vs public; active vs passive; and something vs hedonism, though I'm not clear
what. "Achievement", says Greenfield, in a flash.

    She's suspicious of happiness, of pleasure, unless it springs from improving
activity like writing books or healthful, physical activity. (Her mother's
daughter, she herself loves dancing.) In her future-nightmare world, humanity
has sunk into sensation-seeking passivity, lost in chemical oblivion or mindless
cyber-entertainment, living only for the pleasure of the moment.

    If that's the threat from modern technology, spelt out in Tomorrow's People
in vivid detail, the way to avoid it is less clear. She speaks generally of
education, and of encouraging young people to greater personal achievement. We
have to work from the bottom up, she says. "Scientific literacy" is the way
forward, Greenfield insists.

    Tomorrow's People criticises the Technophobe, the Technophile and the Cynic.
So what's a preferable stance? I ask. Should the ideal citizen be a
Technosceptic? "No," she says, "I think what we need is a techno- savvy
populace, who say, now that we have this technology, how can we use it, how can
we make the most of it?"

    As an entrepreneur, Greenfield does not warm to government regulation as a
restraint to technological excess. Instead, she advocates the formation of a
Science Peace Corps to develop technologies to tackle the plight of the
developing world: "the age-old issues of drought, flood, famine, infection,
corruption and contraception". Perhaps "by taking on stark reality," she says,
"we might be able to stave off the more alarming excesses of the new
technologies that could corrode our human individuality."

    "The private ego is the most precious thing we each have," she argues, "and
it is far more vulnerable now than ever before." Being human is not a sufficient
safeguard; human nature is too malleable, too open to environmental influence.
Rather, we need to design and plan a world, she says, in which the individual is
celebrated above all else.

    Yet the author herself is ample proof that individuality is alive and
kicking. Why should someone who exudes such a sense of self - not even afraid to
let down her long blonde hair for the photographer in the Royal Institution's
poster - be so sure that the private ego is under siege? Could it be that
everyone else seems bland in comparison? If so, her next venture - three months
as Thinker in Residence in Adelaide - might just reassure her that human
individuality shows no signs of fading away just yet.

    SUSAN GREENFIELD

    BIOGRAPHY

    BORN IN 1950 in London, the daughter of a dancer and an electrician, Susan
Greenfield grew up in Chiswick, studied at St Hilda's College, Oxford, and took
a DPhil in Oxford's Department of Pharmacology. In 1985, she was appointed
university lecturer in synaptic pharmacology, and a fellow of Lincoln College,
Oxford. In 1991 she married Professor Peter Atkins, the chemist and author of
best-selling textbooks. She became a Life Peer in 2001. Since 1996, she has been
professor of pharmacology, senior research fellow at Lincoln College, Oxford,
and an honorary fellow at St Hilda's. At Oxford she heads a multi-disciplinary
group researching brain mechanisms linked to neurodegeneration. Her company,
BrainBoost Ltd, is developing non-pharmaceutical approaches to Alzheimer's
disease. In 1995 she published her theory of consciousness, Journey to the
Centres of the Mind, which she developed further in The Private Life of the
Brain (2000). In 1994 she was the first woman to give the Royal Institution
Christmas lectures, and in 1998 was appointed its director. Her TV series Brain
Story was broadcast on BBC2 in 2000 and her new book, Tomorrow's People, appears
from Allen Lane this week.

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 2003


                             586 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2003 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                         September 17, 2003, Wednesday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 207 words

HEADLINE: OXFORD BIO STICKS BY COLLINS STEWART

BYLINE: STEPHEN FOLEY

BODY:


    COLLINS STEWART has unveiled its first significant corporate fundraising
since becoming embroiled in a bitter public dispute with a former employee. The
embattled stockbroker is underwriting a pounds 20m rights issue for Oxford
BioMedica, the loss-making biotech group.

    Shares in Collins Stewart have fallen by more than one-fifth since
allegations of insider dealing and stock ramping were made against the group by
a former analyst, James Middleweek. Collins Stewart has vigorously denied the
claims, contained in a lawsuit in which Mr Middleweek alleges unfair dismissal.

    The shares were up 6p to 382.5p yesterday but remain well off their peak on
fears that the row could damage Collins Stewart's reputation.

    It is believed that about half of Oxford BioMedica's shareholders had
informally agreed to take up their rights by last week but the size of the
discount at which they were priced yesterday - 17p compared to Monday's closing
price of 25.25p - may tempt many more to participate.

    Oxford BioMedica, a gene therapy firm, believes the 27-for-50 rights issue
will put it in a stronger position to negotiate a licensing deal for its main
product, TroVax, a treatment for colorectal, breast and renal cancers.

LOAD-DATE: September 17, 2003


                             598 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2003 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                             August 8, 2003, Friday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 269 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY COULD SLOW MOTOR NEURONE DISEASE

BYLINE: STEVE CONNOR

BODY:


    A POTENTIAL breakthrough in the treatment of motor neurone disease has been
announced by scientists in the US who have prolonged the survival of mice
suffering from the same fatal disorder of the nervous system.

    The researchers used a radical form of genetic treatment to protect vital
nerve cells in the brain and spinal cord that would otherwise degenerate in
motor neurone disease. As a result of the gene therapy, the average lifespan of
the mice doubled and there was a delay in the onset of symptoms which, in
humans, result in a gradual and total paralysis of the muscles.

    The scientists claim that the results are the best that anyone has achieved
with motor neurone disease, and say they expect to start clinical trials on
humans next year - though it will still be many years before it is approved for
wider use.

    The study, published in the journal Science, was carried out by a team led
by Fred Gage, professor of genetics at the Salk Institute in La Jolla,
California, and Jeffrey Rothstein, professor of neurology and neuroscience at
Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore, Maryland.

    Using a type of common cold virus genetically engineered with a gene for
insulin-like growth factor (IGF-1) - a protein that can protect nerve cells -
the scientists gave the mice injections into their muscles.

    The virus carried the gene into the nerves and to the brain and spinal cord,
where it counteracted the effects of the disease, Professor Gage said.

    Mice treated with the IGF-1 gene at 60 days of age developed symptoms 31
days later than untreated mice, and lived 40 days longer.

LOAD-DATE: August 8, 2003


                             603 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2003 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                              July 7, 2003, Monday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 308 words

HEADLINE: DNA PATCH' THERAPY SKIPS GENE DEFECTS

BYLINE: CHARLES ARTHUR TECHNOLOGY EDITOR

BODY:


    BRITISH-BASED scientists have developed a new treatment for genetic defects,
which could help thousands of people suffering from a muscle- wasting disease
that kills them by the age of 30.

    The therapy, so far tested in mice, could be tried out on volunteers with
Duchenne muscular dystrophy, a genetic disease which rapidly erodes muscular
strength, within a few years, suggested Professor Terrence Partridge, who with
Dr Qi Long Lu at the Medical Research Council's Clinical Sciences Centre has
developed the new approach.

    "Most people with muscular dystrophy have a fault in the middle of the gene
which prevents it from making the correct protein," said Professor Partridge.

    "We have used antisense' therapy, which effectively skips over the faulty
piece of the gene. Most DMD patients have a defect in the middle of the gene
that you can get rid of without a loss of function."

    Antisense therapy injects drugs with small pieces of genetic code that trick
the cell's gene-translating machinery into jumping past a particular piece of
DNA. By omitting the faulty part of the DNA, the gene's normal function can be
mostly restored.

    DMD is caused by a genetic defect in the X chromosome, and causes failure of
the muscles to make dystrophin, a protein that stops them from wasting. Between
50 and 100 babies, mostly boys, are born with the disease every year. They
usually die from respiratory or heart failure between the ages of 20 and 30.

    Other researchers have tried gene therapy techniques with the aim of
replacing the faulty genes. Those however demand the use of potentially virulent
viruses to deliver the genetic material. The MRC team, whose work is published
today in the journal Nature Medicine, believes the antisense method offers a
safer route, because it is highly specific to the dystrophin gene.

LOAD-DATE: July 7, 2003


                             604 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2003 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                              July 7, 2003, Monday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 308 words

HEADLINE: DNA PATCH' THERAPY SKIPS GENE DEFECTS

BYLINE: CHARLES ARTHUR TECHNOLOGY EDITOR

BODY:


    BRITISH-BASED scientists have developed a new treatment for genetic defects,
which could help thousands of people suffering from a muscle- wasting disease
that kills them by the age of 30.

    The therapy, so far tested in mice, could be tried out on volunteers with
Duchenne muscular dystrophy, a genetic disease which rapidly erodes muscular
strength, within a few years, suggested Professor Terrence Partridge, who with
Dr Qi Long Lu at the Medical Research Council's Clinical Sciences Centre has
developed the new approach.

    "Most people with muscular dystrophy have a fault in the middle of the gene
which prevents it from making the correct protein," said Professor Partridge.

    "We have used antisense' therapy, which effectively skips over the faulty
piece of the gene. Most DMD patients have a defect in the middle of the gene
that you can get rid of without a loss of function."

    Antisense therapy injects drugs with small pieces of genetic code that trick
the cell's gene-translating machinery into jumping past a particular piece of
DNA. By omitting the faulty part of the DNA, the gene's normal function can be
mostly restored.

    DMD is caused by a genetic defect in the X chromosome, and causes failure of
the muscles to make dystrophin, a protein that stops them from wasting. Between
50 and 100 babies, mostly boys, are born with the disease every year. They
usually die from respiratory or heart failure between the ages of 20 and 30.

    Other researchers have tried gene therapy techniques with the aim of
replacing the faulty genes. Those however demand the use of potentially virulent
viruses to deliver the genetic material. The MRC team, whose work is published
today in the journal Nature Medicine, believes the antisense method offers a
safer route, because it is highly specific to the dystrophin gene.

LOAD-DATE: July 7, 2003


                             606 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2003 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                              July 4, 2003, Friday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 358 words

HEADLINE: MARKET MOVERS OXFORD BIOMEDICA UP ON TREATMENT HOPE + BROKER
DOWNGRADES SERCO + GOWRINGS BULLISH ON BURGERS + ONLINE TRAVEL PLANS PLACING

BODY:


    bBritish Airways 163p (up 8.5p, 5.5 per cent). Posts better than expected
traffic figures for June.

    bCordiant 3.07p (up 0.67p, 27.9 per cent). Syrian investor Nahed Ojjeh picks
up a 2 per cent stake in the advertising group.

    bMarlborough Stirling 34p (up 7p, 25.9 per cent). Trading update from the
software group proves to be not as bad as some investors had feared.

    bOxford BioMedica 16.25p (up 2.25p, 16.1 per cent). Reports encouraging
early stage progress for its MetXia gene therapy treatment.

    bGowrings 61.5p (up 7p, 12.8 per cent). Assures investors that full year
results will meet expectations and reports an improvement in trading at its
Burger King restaurants.

    bOffshore Telecom 0.52p (up 0.05p, 10.6 per cent). Investors warm to solid
interim results from the group.

    bClarkson 277.5p (up 17.5p, 6.7 per cent). Boasts that its full-year figures
will beat current market expectations thanks to buoyant trading over the past
four months.

    bT Clarke 469.5p (up 7.5p, 1.6 per cent). Aquires two acquisitions for a
total of pounds 3.4m.

    bSpeedy Hire 350p (up 2p, 0.7 per cent). Buys Kingfisher Hire and Sales for
pounds 1.4m.

    bHawtin 9.5p (up 0.25p, 2.7 per cent). The Cardiff conglomerate sell its
swimming pool equipment business to a Spanish company for pounds 5.7m.

    nSerco Group 158p (down 10.5p, 6.2 per cent). Merrill Lynch downgrades to
"neutral" from "buy" after disappointing trading statement.

    nSomerfield 122p (down 5.5p, 4.3 per cent). Profit taking after the
supermarket chain posts strong results.

    nGoshawk Insurance 78.5p (down 26.5p, 25.2 per cent). Chris Fagan, the chief
executive, issues a massive profit warning and announces that the company is up
for sale.

    nOnline Travel 20.5p (down 2.5p, 10.9 per cent). Unveils plans to raise
pounds 1.2m via the placing of 5.8 million new shares at 21p.

    nBritish Biotech 59.5p (down 4.5p, 7.0 per cent). Unveils pounds 90m
all-share merger with Vernalis.

    nMm02 55p (down 2p, 3.5 per cent). Worries about increased competition from
rival Hutchison continue to take their toll.

    SEAQ TRADES: 163,928

    SEAQ VOLUMES: 3.53bn

LOAD-DATE: July 4, 2003


                             607 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2003 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                              July 4, 2003, Friday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 358 words

HEADLINE: MARKET MOVERS OXFORD BIOMEDICA UP ON TREATMENT HOPE + BROKER
DOWNGRADES SERCO + GOWRINGS BULLISH ON BURGERS + ONLINE TRAVEL PLANS PLACING

BODY:


    bBritish Airways 163p (up 8.5p, 5.5 per cent). Posts better than expected
traffic figures for June.

    bCordiant 3.07p (up 0.67p, 27.9 per cent). Syrian investor Nahed Ojjeh picks
up a 2 per cent stake in the advertising group.

    bMarlborough Stirling 34p (up 7p, 25.9 per cent). Trading update from the
software group proves to be not as bad as some investors had feared.

    bOxford BioMedica 16.25p (up 2.25p, 16.1 per cent). Reports encouraging
early stage progress for its MetXia gene therapy treatment.

    bGowrings 61.5p (up 7p, 12.8 per cent). Assures investors that full year
results will meet expectations and reports an improvement in trading at its
Burger King restaurants.

    bOffshore Telecom 0.52p (up 0.05p, 10.6 per cent). Investors warm to solid
interim results from the group.

    bClarkson 277.5p (up 17.5p, 6.7 per cent). Boasts that its full-year figures
will beat current market expectations thanks to buoyant trading over the past
four months.

    bT Clarke 469.5p (up 7.5p, 1.6 per cent). Aquires two acquisitions for a
total of pounds 3.4m.

    bSpeedy Hire 350p (up 2p, 0.7 per cent). Buys Kingfisher Hire and Sales for
pounds 1.4m.

    bHawtin 9.5p (up 0.25p, 2.7 per cent). The Cardiff conglomerate sell its
swimming pool equipment business to a Spanish company for pounds 5.7m.

    nSerco Group 158p (down 10.5p, 6.2 per cent). Merrill Lynch downgrades to
"neutral" from "buy" after disappointing trading statement.

    nSomerfield 122p (down 5.5p, 4.3 per cent). Profit taking after the
supermarket chain posts strong results.

    nGoshawk Insurance 78.5p (down 26.5p, 25.2 per cent). Chris Fagan, the chief
executive, issues a massive profit warning and announces that the company is up
for sale.

    nOnline Travel 20.5p (down 2.5p, 10.9 per cent). Unveils plans to raise
pounds 1.2m via the placing of 5.8 million new shares at 21p.

    nBritish Biotech 59.5p (down 4.5p, 7.0 per cent). Unveils pounds 90m
all-share merger with Vernalis.

    nMm02 55p (down 2p, 3.5 per cent). Worries about increased competition from
rival Hutchison continue to take their toll.

    SEAQ TRADES: 163,928

    SEAQ VOLUMES: 3.53bn

LOAD-DATE: July 4, 2003


                             617 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2003 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            June 25, 2003, Wednesday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 497 words

HEADLINE: PLAN TO STORE DNA OF EVERY BABY TO TAILOR HEALTH CARE;
 GENETICS WHITE PAPER CALLS FOR NHS TO OFFER REVOLUTIONARY TREATMENT

BYLINE: STEVE CONNOR SCIENCE EDITOR The Health Secretary, John Reid, meets a
cardiac physiologist, Luke Horsfield, to examine a project at Great Ormond
Street Hospital to trace patients with a genetic history of high blood
cholesterol Stefan Rousseau

BODY:


    ALL BABIES born in Britain could have their DNA stored in a national
databank for their future medical treatment as part of a pounds 50m genetics
initiative published yesterday.

    The Government will spend the money over the next three years on expanding
medical genetics in the NHS while protecting people against the misuse of DNA
testing.

    As part of the initiative, the Government has asked its watchdog on DNA
technology, the Human Genetics Commission, to consider the case for screening
every baby at birth and storing their genetic profile for future use in
tailoring health care according to their needs and their genes.

    Extra money is being made available to extend gene therapy, a revolutionary
treatment that promises to cure inherited conditions, and promote
pharmacogenetics, the science of tailoring drugs to suit a person's specific
genetic makeup.

    At the same time, the genetics White Paper promises to outlaw the testing of
someone's DNA without their consent and to prevent unfair discrimination based
simply on genetic characteristics.

    Tony Blair says in a foreword to the White Paper, Our Inheritance, Our
Future: "The more we understand about the human genome, the greater will be the
impact on our lives and on our health care.

    "As an increasing number of diseases are linked to particular genes or gene
sequences, we will be able to target and tailor treatment better to offset their
impact and even to avoid the onset of ill-health many years in advance."

    Much of the money - pounds 18m - will go towards upgrading the NHS's
genetics laboratories where DNA testing of patients takes place. Millions more
is to be spent on expanding the number of genetics counsellors and laboratory
technicians.

    It has also promised to introduce legislation to make it an offence to test
someone's DNA without their knowledge or consent, except as part of their
medical treatment where consent is impossible to obtain, or as part of an
investigation by the police or the courts.

    The White Paper also states that the Government "will consider the evidence
for unfair discrimination against people on the basis of their genetic
characteristics and the appropriate means of addressing any concerns in this
area".

    Tom Shakespeare, a DNA ethicist at the University of Newcastle, praised the
proposals, but added: "The open question is whether either gene therapy or
pharmacogenetics will ever fulfil the huge hopes and expectations of both
researchers and scientists. Early hype proved premature - turning DNA research
into genetic health benefits is much harder than anyone ever imagined."

    Alistair Kent, director of the Genetics Interest Group, said pounds 50m was
a "drop in the ocean" but an important drop to help to provide the
infrastructure needed by the NHS. Baroness Kennedy of The Shaws, chairwoman of
the Human Genetics Commission, welcomed the White Paper because it addressed
widely held fears over genetic discrimination.

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 2003


                             618 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2003 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            June 25, 2003, Wednesday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 530 words

HEADLINE: GOVERNMENT'S POUNDS 50M GENETICS FUND TO DEVELOP BESPOKE DRUGS

BYLINE: STEVE CONNOR

BODY:


    THE GOVERNMENT'S pledge of pounds 50m over the next three years follows the
pounds 30m it announced in 2001 to develop specialised NHS genetics services.

    DNA promises to revolutionise medicine in the coming decades, the White
Paper says, now that it can be used to diagnose, treat and even prevent serious
diseases.

    "Genetics knowledge will permeate health care, bringing more accurate
diagnosis, more personalised prediction of risk, new drugs and therapies,
prevention and treatment better targeted to the disease, and tailored according
to a person's individual genetic profile," it says.

    Tailored drugs

    Pharmacogenetics is likely to wield the greatest impact in the short- term,
when the genetic variation between patients is used to assess the type of drugs
and the way they are prescribed.

    "As our understanding grows about how genes and drugs interact, patients
could undergo a genetic test to predict their response and help ensure that the
medicine and dose is right first time," the White Paper says.

    "This should improve outcomes, reduce wastage and help avoid serious
side-effects. New pharmaceutical products linked to a genetic test are likely to
become available within the next five years."

    Gene therapy

    Rather than dealing with the symptoms, a gene-based approach to medicine can
tackle the root causes of the disease or disorder. One example is gene therapy,
where doctors attempt to correct a defective gene or cure disease by introducing
genetically altered tissues or vaccines.

    More than 600 clinical trials of gene therapy are under way around the
world, involving nearly 3,000 patients. Some children suffering from supposedly
fatal inherited diseases have been declared cured of their condition. The
Government will spend pounds 2.5m over five years to support gene therapy for
cystic fibrosis, the most common single-gene disorder in the UK.

    The White Paper says: "At the current rate of development we can expect to
see the first licensed gene therapy medicines coming on stream within five to
ten years."

    Genetic screening

    The Government is already funding, through the Medical Research Council, a
research project where 500,000 people will be genetically screened to tease out
the role of genes and the environment in the triggering of diseases. The UK
Biobank project could be the forerunner of a national DNA databank where every
newborn child's DNA is stored for the future use in pharmacogenetics. The White
Paper says that the Human Genetics Commission has been asked to report on this
screening proposal by the end of next year.

    Public education

    About pounds 15m will be spent on developing six genetics knowledge parks.
"They will be able to work in partnership with the private sector to develop new
genetic medicines and treatments and an extended range of diagnostic and
predictive genetic tests," the White Paper says. It adds: "We want to engage in
a genuine dialogue on genetics issues. We recognise that developments in
genetics will present new ethical and social challenges."

    "We need to be alert to the potential adverse consequences and prepared to
take action where necessary."

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 2003


                             624 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2003 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            June 21, 2003, Saturday

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 737 words

HEADLINE: BOOKS: LEARNING OUR LIMITS;
 FINN BOWRING (ABOVE) ASKS WHAT SCIENCE SHOULDN'T DO, WHILE PETER

BYLINE: FINN BOWRING Above: James Watson, opinionated and naive' genius of DNA

BODY:


    Enough: genetic engineering and the end of human nature

    Bill McKibben

    Bloomsbury

    pounds 17.99, 274pp

    pounds 15.99 (plus pounds 2.25 p&p per order) from 0870 8001122

    IF YOU are worried about the consequences of the biotech revolution, you
will welcome Bill McKibben's effort to determine the social and ethical limits,
the "enough point", beyond which the technologies of genetic modification and
nano-engineering should not pass. At stake, in his view, is humanity's unique
capacity for conscious reasoning and moral betterment, and with it our ability
to stretch for, and equally to restrain, our desires. What is today in jeopardy
is precisely that right which the biotech zealots invoke to legitimise their
work: the right to individual freedom.

    Human genetic engineering will be an assault on human liberty because it
violates the open future of the new-born child. McKibben concedes that all
parents exert an influence on the development of their children, but this
normally accommodates the child's right to rebel. In contrast, "the engineered
child won't have the same ability to walk away from you. If you get the proteins
right, it may never occur to him to do so".

    McKibben envisages a 16-year-old girl unsure whether her joy arises from the
boy she has fallen in love with or the happiness-enhancing DNA she inherited as
an engineered embryo. She may also be unable to claim this spirit of
questioning, since she may be endowed with a custom-elevated IQ. There is
something frighteningly irrevocable about human genetic enhancement, for any
dissenting judgements from those with manipulated cognitive powers will always
be of suspect moral status.

    In arguing for the self-limiting of biotechnology, McKibben gives salutary
examples of cultures which have renounced specific technologies without harming
their development. Drawing up his own moral Rubicon, McKibben offers a guarded
"yes" to somatic gene therapy, pre-implantation genetic diagnosis, therapeutic
cloning and the limited use of nano-engineering. But he says "enough" when it
comes to modifying the human germline, gestating human clones, conquering our
mortality, and self-replicating nano-machines.

    Though thoughtful and humane, the arguments of this book are not always
convincing. One problem is the author's tendency to swallow the more fanciful
claims of biotechnology enthusiasts and pander to an extreme form of genetic
determinism. McKibben offers a sobering insight into the opinionated and
socially naive mind of James Watson, demonstrating that being a brilliant
biologist does not make you a reasonable or sensitive person. Yet while exposing
the flawed attitudes of one scientist, McKibben relies on the private opinion of
another - a researcher who assures him that we can "engineer higher
intelligence" and "increased athletic ability" - as his ultimate proof that
"this new world can't be wished away".

    Many other scientists believe our capacity to identify and manipulate the
genetic foundations of thoughts and behaviours has been grossly exaggerated. The
real danger is that creating children as predetermined products will invite
parents to exert inordinate control over the environment in which they are
reared. Would you pay for the genes of an Olympic athlete, then allow your
creation to pursue an interest in music or books? Indeed, if McKibben's
confidence in biological determinism were valid, many of his arguments would be
weakened. In this case, there is no reason why your 16-year-old daughter
shouldn't already attribute her joyful feelings to hormonal changes, the
accidents of heredity, or forces of natural selection.

    The pressing danger is not that humanity will eliminate the biological
substrates of human experience, but that it thinks this experience can be
reduced to a mechanical, and manipulable, cause. Unfortunately, this thought is
already with us, as is the thought that parents have the right to predetermine
the future of their children, and companies the right to take apart environments
and communities in order to sell them back as commodities. When McKibben extols
the dignity of paid work in preference to its technological abolition, you may
wonder whether his determination to say "enough" leads him towards a political
quietism that is a little too accepting of the status quo.

    Finn Bowring is the author of Science, Seeds and Cyborgs' (Verso)

LOAD-DATE: June 21, 2003


                             625 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2003 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            June 12, 2003, Thursday

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1045 words

HEADLINE: UNDERGRADUATE BIOLOGY: LIFE'S SECRETS AT YOUR FINGERTIPS;
 FROM GM FOOD TO UNRAVELLING THE HUMAN GENOME, THERE'S NEVER BEEN A

BYLINE: STEPHEN MCCORMACK British universities have been expanding their
teaching of bioscience

BODY:


    Biology degrees just aren't what they used to be, you know. They're even
more diverse than just a few years back and increasingly relevant to the cutting
edge issues of the 21st century. These are issues of scientific, political,
ethical and philosophical significance.

    At the last count, there were more than 4,600 courses at British
universities with a bioscientific slant - courses that take you down many more
paths than two decades ago. If you come out of university in three or four years
with a degree that has a strong biological element, then a vital part of the
world of work will be your oyster - and you might just learn a few things about
oysters along the way.

    Scan the newspapers these days and it is impossible not to detect a strong
biological theme - SARS, genetically modified crops, cloning and gene therapy to
tackle diseases to name a few. If you want to understand these matters in any
depth - and maybe even influence the debate - you'll need to start with an
undergraduate grounding in a relevant academic discipline.

    That's what the best-selling science writer Matt Ridley did when he went to
Oxford as a zoology undergraduate a couple of decades ago. Referring to the
newly advanced understanding of the human species that came with the unravelling
of the human genome, he says there could never be a better time to study a
biology-related subject. "For the first time in four billion years, a creature
on this planet is reading its own recipe. Who would not like to have a ringside
seat?"

    Britain's universities have been rejigging their departments to reflect the
expanding role of "bioscience" - the latest buzzword - in the real and academic
worlds. Leeds University, for example, created a new Faculty of Biological
Sciences in 1998, pulling together three schools: the School of Biology, the
School of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, and the School of Biomedical
Sciences. Most other institutions have undertaken similar exercises.

    If you glance down the lists of degree courses on university websites,
you'll see how study programmes are changing to match the new reality. A random
sample would include zoology, genetics, microbiology, tropical disease biology
and evolutionary psychology.

    It's worth remembering what is at the heart of a single honours biology
degree. All biology degrees will cover key aspects of the structure, function,
evolution, behaviour and ecology of animals and plants. "It's not just looking
down microscopes," says Georgina Day, education officer at the Institute of
Biology. "Just as important is the IT component, being able to use software to
model biological systems and to analyse data. Communicating findings is also
important, so making presentations will be part of any biology course."

    A biology teacher friend of mine described the attraction of biology thus:
"It's real life. Guts and gore. It's wanting to know how we work."

    So, given the plethora of biology-related degrees to choose from, how do you
decide what to do? To start this process, think about what you have enjoyed most
so far in your school studies. Has it been looking down a microscope, working
out the function of a structure, or just being outdoors among plants or animals?
All university websites will provide course titles and details of the course
itself. Talk to the admissions departments. Find out exactly how you'll be
spending your time in the first year. Then decide which courses will suit you.

    But if you're still uncertain, then a very sensible and safe option is to do
single honours biology or something similar. These courses will typically cover
the full range of core subjects in the first year and open up avenues for
specialisation in later years. Armed with the fundamentals of the subject, by
the time your finals approach you may have already specialised in genetics,
immunology, animal behaviour, plant biology or biochemistry.

    This is a safe approach because it is much easier to specialise from a base
of core knowledge and skills than to move from one specialisation - zoology, for
example - to another - genetics, say - midway through a degree course.

    Recognising this , Leeds University is in the process of piloting a new
degree, called bioscience, which will initially spread itself across the three
different schools in the faculty, so that first-year undergraduates, unsure of
exactly where they want to concentrate, will be exposed to as wide a range of
subjects as possible.

    "We have 160 academics across the three schools in the faculty," explains Dr
Celia Knight, director of teaching in the School of Biology. "This new degree is
part of our intention to allow more pick-and-mixing of topics by students.

    "Leeds positively encourages students to change courses within the lifetime
of their degree - so much that we prompt people at the end of the first year to
ask themselves if they are on the right course, and if not we help them to
change."

    Dr Knight enthuses about the merits of doing a biology-related degree in the
first place. "We are in a period of explosive development which has real
potential for massive advances in medicine, agriculture and technology," she
says.

    "But at the same time there are fears and dangers in people's minds about
scientific advances. Only by understanding through education can we address
these fears," Dr Knight says.

    One obvious example is the debate over genetically modified food. The
science exists, according to Dr Knight, to counter vitamin A deficiency and
provide an instant alternative to medicine in the Third World. But this can't
happen until the ethical concerns widely prevalent in developed countries are
addressed.

    This is just one area where a biology degree can lead to scientifically and
intellectually stimulating study. Not all study will, of course, be in
controversial areas, but the very imperfect nature of life on earth means that
biological study is a fast-moving field where new areas of research and new
techniques are opening up all the time.

    And even if you don't find yourself earning your living dealing with these
issues, you'll have had an interesting time at university, and you will leave
armed with several skills sought after by employers.

LOAD-DATE: June 12, 2003


                             627 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2003 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            June 4, 2003, Wednesday

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 8,9

LENGTH: 1302 words

HEADLINE: SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY: THE ART OF NOISE;
 AS ANY PARENT KNOWS, ULTRASOUND HAS BEEN USED FOR YEARS TO CHECK ON

BYLINE: SIMON HADLINGTON A pregnant woman receives a scan. But ultrasound is
useful for more than just foetal imaging

BODY:


    For most of us, the word "ultrasound" probably conjures up a grainy scene of
grey and white swirls which, with guidance from a skilled radiographer, we can
more or less accept as being an image of a baby developing in the womb. For
decades ultrasound has been used as an important technique for imaging within
the body, particularly to check the health of the growing foetus in pregnant
women. It is safe, cheap and reliable. But now ultrasound is beginning to find
new roles in medicine, from "acoustic surgery" - killing cancerous tumours
without recourse to a scalpel - to potentially helping to deliver drugs, and
even genes, into cells.

    Ultrasound is sound that is beyond the range of human hearing - generally
defined in physics as sound with a frequency of more than 20,000 hertz. It is
propagated as a wave, and travels by the mechanical vibration of molecules
through a medium. Ultrasound waves are generated by devices called transducers,
which contain "piezoelectric" materials. These vibrate at given frequencies when
an electric field is applied to them.

    "For many years ultrasound has been used in diagnostic medicine by using a
pulse-echo technique," says Professor Tim Mason, the director of the
Sonochemistry Centre at Coventry University. "A pulse of high-frequency
ultrasound is sent out and the returning echo is detected. By calculating the
time difference between the pulse and echo it is possible to construct an image
of what the wave has encountered."

    For medical imaging the ultrasound has low power. It can penetrate the skin
but does not have sufficient energy to do damage. But for decades medical
scientists have pondered how to harness ultrasound energy to destroy unhealthy
tissue within the body - cancerous tumours, for example.

    Simply to increase the energy of the sound wave, by lowering its frequency,
would not work. As soon as the sound wave encountered the surface of the skin it
would heat it up dangerously. "But if you took two high-frequency beams - each
on their own being harmless - and directed them into the body from two different
points, where they intersect you would get twice the energy," says Professor
Mason. "So if you had several beams meeting at a point, you could obtain
sufficient energies at the focus to heat up tissue and kill it at that specific
point." This is called high-intensity focused ultrasound (Hifu).

    Professor Gail ter Haar is head of ultrasound therapy at the Institute of
Cancer Research at the Royal Marsden Hospital in London. "We have been
researching Hifu for more than 20 years and built the first clinical prototype,
which has been tested on 74 patients with various types of cancer," she says.

    "Everyone recalls as a child using a magnifying glass to focus the sun's
rays to a point where you can burn a hole in leaves or paper. It is only at the
focus that the rays are powerful enough to cause burning. Hifu works in the same
way. We take a source of ultrasound outside the body and focus it on the target
tissue."

    The ultrasound beam is generated in a concave-shaped transducer, so that the
waves emanating from the transducer converge at a point some distance from the
source. At the focal point, a few millimetres across, tissue is heated to around
56C or higher, sufficient to kill the cells at that point without damaging the
neighbours.

    "One of the main difficulties has been in monitoring what is happening,"
says Professor ter Haar. It has been necessary to alternate Hifu treatment with
ultrasound imaging to monitor the therapy, making the process time consuming.
Nevertheless, says Professor ter Haar, "where we have targeted tumours, it has
been very successful in killing tissue."

    Another approach being investigated by the team is in sealing off the blood
vessels that feed tumours. A short burst of Hifu can cauterise small blood
vessels, and it is possible that this could be a way of "starving" cancers of
their blood supply. Researchers at the Royal Marsden are hoping to obtain
funding to build a second system.

    Meanwhile, a new Chinese system has been developed that could bring the
technique closer to routine use. The machine, the first Hifu instrument of its
type and the only one in the West, is being tested on patients at the Churchill
Hospital in Oxford.

    Tim Mason was instrumental in bringing the Chinese device to the country. "I
was in China in 1999 examining a PhD student when I was invited to a hospital in
Chongqing to see this machine," he recalls. "I was very impressed with it, and
at the time was talking to investors who were interested in developing a Hifu
system. The Chinese system was very close to what they had in mind, and they
agreed to invest in the technology."

    A machine is in use at the Churchill Hospital and is undergoing clinical
trials on patients with advanced liver cancer. The Chinese system has overcome
the monitoring problem by having an imaging ultrasound transducer alongside the
Hifu transducer, so that the treatment can be observed as it is being done.

    "I think as a therapy Hifu is enormously exciting," says Professor ter Haar.
"For liver cancer there is often little that patients can be offered, and here
we have a potential for using something that does not require surgery, and as
far as we know the Chinese system has been very successful."

    Ultrasound is also finding other new applications in medicine. At the
University of Wales College of Medicine, Dr Nazar Amso and his research team are
working with colleagues at Cardiff University to investigate the effect of
ultrasound waves on the porosity of cell membranes.

    Many medical interventions require large, unwieldy molecules to enter cells
across the cell membrane. This can often be difficult to achieve. One possible
way of increasing the "leakiness" of cells is to expose them to ultrasonic
waves. "We have developed unique techniques for studying what happens when cells
are put in the path of ultrasound," says Dr Amso. "We have demonstrated
conclusively with red blood cells that we can induce changes in the appearance
of the cell's membrane that had been correlated in the past with an increase in
the membrane's permeability - a phenomenon called sonoporation."

    The researchers are now planning experiments with cell cultures to see if
similar effects can be produced in a more complex cellular system. If ultrasound
can be shown to increase the porosity of cells in the body safely and
reversibly, it could have important applications in many areas.

    In chemotherapy for cancer treatment, for example, it is vital that the
potent toxic drugs that are administered have a minimal effect on the patient's
healthy cells. By directing an ultrasonic wave on to the cancerous tissue when
the drug is administered, it might be possible to ensure that the drug is taken
up preferentially by the more permeable cancer cells.

    Dr Amso's speciality is in reproductive medicine. Freezing human eggs or
other reproductive tissue can be difficult. Upon thawing, the cells are often
irreparably damaged. One way around this is to insert cryoprotectants into the
cells, which prevent damage during freezing. However, these often large
molecules require a special carrier molecule to get them across the cell
membrane. Unfortunately, the carriers themselves are often potentially toxic.
"If we could enable large cryoprotectant molecules to enter the cells without
the need for the carriers, this would be a significant advance," Dr Amso says.

    Another important potential application could be in gene therapy, where
genetic diseases are treated by inserting healthy genes into faulty cells. For
years scientists have struggled to find safe and efficient methods of inserting
the genes. Sonoporation of the cells could provide a new route.

LOAD-DATE: June 4, 2003


                             634 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2003 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                           April 23, 2003, Wednesday

SECTION: COMMENT; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 820 words

HEADLINE: WHY DO WE EXPECT SO MUCH FROM SCIENCE?;
 DNA IS OFTEN CALLED THE BLUEPRINT OF LIFE BUT... IT WOULD BE BETTER

BYLINE: CHARLES ARTHUR

BODY:


    It isn't customary at birthdays for the guest of honour to be handing out
the presents but that seems to be our attitude to DNA. Friday marks 50 years
since the publication in Nature of a short note, called A Letter from Francis
Crick and James Watson, in which they set out their idea of how DNA managed to
squash so much information into such a tiny space.

    And ever since then, we have been saying, "Yes, but what has DNA ever done
for us?" Fifty years on, there is an undercurrent of impatience. Knowing that
the difference of a single gene causes haemo- philia, or determines our eye
colour, or creates a predisposition in certain families to breast cancer, has
led to the expectation that once we have "sequenced" an organism's DNA into its
mantra-like combinations of ATGGTTCCCTATG ..., then we know and can control
everything about it.

    Look at the expectations raised by the fact that a week ago Canadian
scientists sequenced the Sars virus, after their team worked on it for six
straight days, 24 hours a day. That this was feasible just a month after they
began investigating is a tribute to the power of our sequencing systems. But the
researchers who emerged blinking from their laboratories into the unaccustomed
sunlight were entirely accurate to call it "the first step" to developing a
vaccine - not least because other sequencing efforts have shown that Sars is
actually mutating as it goes (entirely predictably for an infectious organism).
Developing a vaccine will involve hitting a moving target. So far, only immune
systems have shown much promise in doing that.

    What about other "promises" that were allegedly made by DNA? What about gene
therapy, whereby our flaky genes would be replaced by perfectly-tuned ones? Or
that we would have our DNA "read" to see what diseases we were prone to and
should guard against?

    At least we can point to people who have been helped by gene therapy,
although none have benefited so far who would not have been helped just as well
by standard bone marrow transplants. Only with no suitable donors being
available, gene therapy was the only way forward.

    DNA, you might feel 50 years after we unravelled it, has let us down. But
the reality is that simply unravelling it does not tell you how it works, any
more than knowing the alphabet helps you to read a book.

    The problem is that we expect too much of DNA. Or rather, that we expect too
much of our limited understanding of DNA, which derives from the metaphors we
use about it. DNA is often called "the blueprint of life", but as the writer
Douglas Adams pointed out, it would be better to call it a recipe. Imagine that
you were trying to describe how to make a fruit cake by writing the blueprint:
currant here, surrounded by certain amount of air-filled cake mixture, and then
more currants. It would be hellish. So how do we make fruit cakes? Not by
blueprint. We use recipes - mix these things together, bake at a particular
temperature for so long, and voila: if you've got the components right, you'll
have currants distributed satisfactorily around your finished product.

    DNA is something like that. Before the human genome was sequenced in its
"rough draft" form, in June 2000, the expectation had been that humans would
turn out to have more than 100,000 genes. To the surprise of many, the figure
seems to be around 45,000 individual genes. To those used to thinking of DNA as
a blueprint, that seemed like far too few; how could you build something as
complex as a human with so few genes? After all, the puffer fish, the second
vertebrate (after humans) to be sequenced has around 30,000 genes, while all it
does is swim around and poison you if it's sliced up the wrong way for sushi.
These are the sort of non-problems that arise when we think by metaphor.

    Where the promises of DNA - promises that we attributed to it - have been
fulfilled is in the diagnostic side. DNA fingerprinting has entered the
language, both for crime and paternity. Medical tests for pathogens use
DNA-based "probes" that can pick up the tiniest bit of a given chunk of nucleic
acid. But on the therapeutic side, we're still a long way off.

    That is not to say that these things are not going to happen. Fifty years
from now, we will look back at our present expectations as hopelessly out of
tune with our abilities. Perhaps, as with space travel, we will think that our
hopes were out of kilter with what was actually needed, or reasonable.

    The decoding of the human genome has been repeatedly compared with putting a
man on the moon. That was 34 years ago, and we have not been back since - but we
have got a lot better at putting satellites and rockets into orbit to look more
closely at ourselves and our planet. Being able to read our DNA might be a
similar step for mankind - but what is going to follow will be smaller,
incremental, and ultimately more of much more use.

LOAD-DATE: April 23, 2003


                             635 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2003 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                           April 23, 2003, Wednesday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 588 words

HEADLINE: OUTLOOK: DEBT-LADEN CONSUMERS MAY UPSET BROWN'S BUDGET FORECASTS

BYLINE: JEREMY WARNER

BODY:


    A FAVOURITE observation of Larry Summers when he was the US Treasury
Secretary was that economic booms don't die of old age; instead they are killed
off by the anti-inflationary zeal of central bankers. This was very much
conventional wisdom at the time, and it was the reason he and other members of
the Clinton Administration gave for believing America's longest ever period of
uninterrupted economic growth might continue more or less indefinitely.

    Unfortunately, he was wrong. He was wrong about the US, and I suspect he's
about to be proved wrong in the application of his theory to Britain too.
Traditionally recessions happen because demand at the end of a long boom
outstrips supply causing prices to rise. In an effort to choke off the
subsequent inflation, policy makers raise interest rates which reduces demand
leading to a surplus of capacity, cut backs, job losses and so on and so forth.

    This time around, the boom is quite literally dying of old age. At the end
of the boom, supply came hugely to oustrip demand over a wide range of
industries. To support demand as business grapples with its excess of capacity
and debt, central bankers in the US and Britain have been cutting interest
rates, but for how much longer can the gene therapy of supporting the economy by
encouraging consumers to borrow and spend continue to work?

    There were some worrying straws in the wind in yesterday's clutch of
economic statistics. Retailers appear to have had a bad easter, despite the end
of the war, which was meant to provide at least a short term boost. There is no
obvious reason for this apart for this apart from the possibility that people
have looked at their borrowings - on average now higher as a percentage of
income than anywhere in the developed world other than Japan - and their pay
cheques for April, which will for the first time show the impact of higher
national insurance, and decided to spend less.

    Figures from the Council for Mortgage Lenders reinforce the picture of
gathering gloom by pointing to a significant fall off in the housing market.
Lending for house purchases in March was 37 per cent lower than its July peak,
and although the war can be blamed for a good portion, it cannot be the whole
story given the long lead times involved in any house purchase.

    That fall is more than cancelled out by booming remortgage business, as
borrowers take advantage of historically low rates to refinance loans. At this
stage we don't know how much of this borrowing was new borrowing to finance
consumption, or equity withdrawal, and how much was straight refinancing. But if
the housing market is cooling, equity withdrawal must eventually slow too,
removing another prop to consumption.

    The hope of policymakers is that they can keep consumption growing for long
enough eventually to see a pick up in business investment. It's proving a long
wait, so long, in fact, that even Gordon Brown, the Chancellor, seems to have
given up the quest. To support his Budget growth forecasts, he is being forced
to assume continued strong growth in consumption for the next three years, which
is one of the reasons nobody can quite believe them. What does the Chancellor
want to do - turn us into a nation of debtors?

    The continued rise in credit card and other forms of unsecured lending - the
popular press has become filled with advertisements for lending deals - is a
deeply worrying phenomenon which is bound to end badly for many, with or without
a rise in interest rates.

LOAD-DATE: April 23, 2003


                             639 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2003 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                             April 21, 2003, Monday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 201 words

HEADLINE: DIABETES CURE HOPES BOOSTED BY MICE TESTS

BYLINE: JOHN VON RADOWITZ

BODY:


    AMERICAN SCIENTISTS using experimental gene therapy on mice believe they may
have found a cure for diabetes.

    The scientists said the treatment, in which a gene was introduced in the
animals that enabled their livers to produce insulin, cured them of the
condition. The hope is to use the therapy on humans, although it is at an early
stage.

    Professor Lawrence Chan, who led the research at the Baylor College of
Medicine in Houston, Texas, said: "It's a proof of principle. The exciting part
is that mice are cured'."

    Liver cells were induced to become beta cells, which produce insulin and
three other hormones. Beta cells are normally found within small bodies embedded
in the pancreas, called "islets".

    Professor Chan's team used a doctored virus to carry the beta cell gene into
the mouse liver cells. On its own, the gene partially corrected the disease.
Combined with a biochemical that promotes growth, the diabetic mice were cured
for at least four months.

    Diabetes, which affects about 1.4 million Britons, occurs when glucose sugar
is not used properly to fuel cells, and builds up in the blood. If not treated,
a person with diabetes will lapse into a coma and die.

LOAD-DATE: April 21, 2003


                             647 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2003 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            April 5, 2003, Saturday

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 834 words

HEADLINE: BOOKS: SCIENCE FICTION;
 NO ONE HAS EVER CAST STEVEN ROSE AS AN UNCRITICAL FAN OF

BYLINE: STEVEN ROSE

BODY:


    Science, Seeds and Cyborgs

    Finn Bowring

    Verso

    pounds 19, 338pp

    pounds 19 (plus pounds 1.99 p&p per order) from 0870 8001122

    THE ARGUMENTS over the promises and threats of the new genetics have been
well-rehearsed. On one hand are the techno-optimists. As the human genome is
deciphered, molecular biologists proudly wave CDs to bemused audiences, telling
them that before long we will all have our own personalised Book of Life on a
disc, allowing us to read off what we will live and die of, our sexual
orientation, tendency to job satisfaction and voting pattern.

    Human genetic engineering will eliminate our unhealthy genes, enhance our
most desirable features. Plant and animal biotechnology will produce
pest-resistant crops, and cows with medicines in their milk. What genetic
engineering cannot solve pharmacogenetics will, providing a bespoke pill for
every ill. Further down the line, bioengineering and informatics will fuse to
produce living hybrid machines to serve our every need. Biotopia is at hand - if
not now, then a suitable number of years and billions of dollars down the road.

    On the other are the prophets of gloom. Life is too complex for us to
understand; to mess around with genes will result in disaster. If genetic
engineering works, it will lead to eugenics; disabled people will be eliminated,
the rich will buy genes for intelligence, blue eyes and blond hair while the
poor will stew in their own genetic juices. Genetically manipulated food masks
unknown toxins, threatens biodiversity and, in the hands of unscrupulous
agribusiness, destroys the livelihood of poor farmers and third-world economies.
Tinkering with life is, if not contrary to God's will, at the very least
treating people as means not ends.

    Recognise the arguments? Who doesn't? We've read our Fukuyama, Stock and
Silver and watched GeneWatch and Monsanto slug it out on television while
Michael Meacher holds the ring. What is unusual is to find the entire range of
the case for the prosecution, from genetics to globalisation, gathered in a
single book. Finn Bowring is a sociologist, but seems more like a witch-hunter
as he confronts biotechnological demons with bell, book and candle in his effort
to awaken the world to the need to exorcise them.

    The book reads like a catalogue of disasters foretold, beginning, of course,
with DNA, that poor traduced molecule. True, you can't read off the four
dimensions of life's history - three of space and one of time - from the
one-dimensional strand of DNA (as Bowring quotes me to prove it, I've no
complaint). But he goes much further, scouring biological heterodoxy in his
effort to dethrone genetic and Darwinian supremacy.

    Molecular biology put in its place, Bowring's next, more familiar, demon is
agribusiness, whose greed for profits overrides ecological caution. But as if
the charge of poor science and ruthless exploitation were not enough, he turns
to the ethics of animal experimentation. Once again, the arguments are familiar,
though not usually in the biotech context: testing drugs on animals is a poor
predictor of their effect in humans; using animals as means and indifference to
animal suffering are morally unacceptable. Quickfire through arguments against
genetic discrimination in insurance and employment, gene therapy and cloning, a
closing burst against a cyborgian future, and we are at the finale.

    Many of Bowring's arguments are valid, and the book, with its 50 pages of
footnotes (albeit often to secondary sources) may well serve as a reference for
those who see a bio-dystopian rather than utopian future. What is largely
lacking is any critical filtering of the data, or any sense that the claims are
sometimes contradictory. At times he verges on the denial of any biological
approach to human disease.

    He quotes approvingly a comment made by Anne Karpf attacking vaccination on
the grounds that it would be better to nurse children through an infection
rather than pampering their immune systems by protecting them. He attacks the
search for biological approaches to treating Alzheimer's on the grounds that it
leads to "the disavowal of meaning in the experiences of those who are ill".

    Alzheimer's is a disease whose biochemical malfunctioning is well
understood, even though the causes for these malfunctions are multiple. The
"meaning" of the experience is the steady loss of memory and disintegration for
the sufferer, and is devastating not only for the individual but for carers. To
deny this is reminiscent of the worst excesses of the Seventies anti- psychiatry
movement and indicative of the approach of an author willing to use any argument
to support his case. I am not renowned for arguing for "balance", but the case
against unregulated biotechnological approaches to solving the world's problems
is too important to cheapen it like this.

    A new edition of Steven Rose's prizewinning book The Making of Memory' will
be published by Cape later this year

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 2003


                             656 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2003 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            March 1, 2003, Saturday

SECTION: COMMENT; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 674 words

HEADLINE: MEA CULPA: IS IT TRUE THAT BLONDES HAVE MORE PUNS?;
 MEA CULPA

BYLINE: GUY KELENY

BODY:


    Why is a hairdo like a legal document? The dubious connection was set up by
Miranda Sawyer in the course of a chatty article on Wednesday about being - and
becoming - a blonde. She was describing a highlighting process: "One stained,
rubber swimming-hat, with teeny holes scattered on its surface; one hook; one
sadist stylist who yanks your crowning glory in clumps through said holes with
said hook."

    Saying "the said" or "said" instead of "the" was a pretty elephantine piece
of satire even when it was first thought of. The idea is to make something look
silly by applying to it language redolent of pompous and overprecise legal
documents. To call, say, the Prime Minister "the said Tony Blair" is supposed to
cut him down to size. Big deal. And now the thing has become a mere rhetorical
tic, devoid of content, just a way of adopting a tone of smart frivolity. Enough
"said".

    Scotch taped: A television preview piece on Thursday spoke of the hopes that
were once held out by gene therapy. "Just about every disease imaginable was
going to be scotched by injecting healthy genetic material into cells." You no
doubt expect me to make the standard pedant's response to any appearance of the
word "scotch". Style guides everywhere point out sternly that "scotch" does not
mean to destroy something, merely to render it temporarily harmless. Well, my
trusty old Oxford dictionary indeed quotes that meaning, dating back to 1798.
But it also cites "to crush, stamp upon, stamp out (something dangerous)" from
1825. So the "wrong" meaning of "scotch" has been around almost as long as the
"right" one. I know that dictionaries merely describe; they do not prescribe the
best usage to which we should aspire, but even so. Perhaps the best usage in
most cases is to avoid this ambiguous and tiresome word, whatever it means.

    Bad scene, man: A profile last Saturday said that the sculptor Antony
Gormley "set off on the hippy trail to India". Where did "hippy" come from? In
the days when there were hippies it was always spelt "hippie". Why? Who knows?
Like they say, if you can remember the Sixties, you weren't there. But it's
still "hippie", not "hippy".

    Daft headline of the week: "London congestion charge leads to flood of false
number plates" (Wednesday). What does a flood of number plates look like? I
suppose if you tipped plenty of number plates out of a container they might
slither about for a bit, but they would still end up looking more like a heap
than a flood. In any case the report beneath this heading refers only to
"dozens" of cases - hardly a flood by any definition.

    Cliche of the week: A report on Tuesday began: "Ellen MacArthur's giant
catamaran was limping towards the coast of Western Australia yesterday, her
dream of setting a record for sailing around the world shattered when her mast
snapped in moderate winds."

    Two cliches here. One day somebody will think of a better image for the
progress of a damaged vessel than "limping". After all, a boat under jury rig
does not proceed jerkily, just slowly and uncertainly. How about "tottering"?

    And why are dreams always said to be shattered? In all other contexts,
dreams are seen as soft, misty, diaphanous. Only hard and brittle things can be
shattered.

    However, we should think ourselves lucky: this being a sporting yacht, not a
merchant ship, it didn't qualify as the ultimate maritime cliche, a "stricken
vessel".

    Incidentally, Ms MacArthur seems to be one of those people who speak in
naturally occurring journalese. We kept quoting her as saying things like: "As I
reached the hatch all became clear in a flash of nausea... the 39.5m mast that
had powered us ahead of the record over the past days was no longer."

    Ness monster: If things go on like this, every abstract noun in the language
will end with "-ness". Our Friday report on the World Trade Centre replacement
said of the architect Daniel Libeskind: "His precociousness showed itself in
remarkable accordion-playing skills." What happened to "precocity"?

LOAD-DATE: March 13, 2003


                             660 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2003 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                          February 27, 2003, Thursday

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 4,5

LENGTH: 1244 words

HEADLINE: MY EUREKA MOMENT;
 FIFTY YEARS AGO TOMORROW, TWO YOUNG SCIENTISTS FINALLY SOLVED

BYLINE: JAMES WATSON The Mona Lisa' of science: James Watson and Francis Crick
with their 1953 model of the molecular structure of DNA

BODY:


    As was normal for a Saturday morning, I got to work at Cambridge
University's Cavendish Laboratory earlier than Francis Crick on 28 February
1953. I had good reason for being up early. I knew that we were close - though I
had no idea just how close - to figuring out the structure of a then
little-known molecule called deoxyribonucleic acid: DNA. This was not any old
molecule: DNA, as Crick and I appreciated, is the chemical structure that holds
the very key to the nature of living things. It stores the hereditary
information that is passed on from one generation to the next, and it
orchestrates the complex world of the cell. Figuring out its three-dimensional
structure - the architecture by which the molecule is put together - would, we
hoped, provide a glimpse of what Crick referred to only half-jokingly as "the
secret of life".

    We already knew that DNA molecules consist of multiple copies of a single
basic unit, the nucleotide, which comes in four forms: adenine (A), thymine (T),
guanine (G), and cytosine (C). I had spent the previous afternoon making
cardboard cut-outs of these various components, and now, undisturbed on a quiet
Saturday morning, I could shuffle around the pieces of the three-dimensional
jigsaw puzzle. How did they all fit together? Soon, I realised that a simple
pairing scheme worked exquisitely well: A fitted neatly with T, and G with C.
Was this it? Did the molecule consist of two chains linked together by A-T and
G-C pairs? It was so simple, so elegant, that it almost had to be right. But I
had made mistakes in the past, and before I could get too excited, my pairing
scheme would have to survive the scrutiny of Crick's critical eye.

    It was an anxious wait. But I need not have worried: Crick realised straight
away that my pairing idea implied a double-helix structure with the two
molecular chains running in opposite directions. Everything known about DNA and
its properties - the facts we had been wrestling with as we tried to solve the
problem - made sense in light of those gentle complementary twists.

    Most importantly, the way the molecule was organised immediately suggested
solutions to two of biology's oldest mysteries: how hereditary information is
stored, and how it is replicated. Despite this, Crick's brag in the Eagle, the
pub where we habitually ate lunch, that we had indeed discovered that "secret of
life", struck me as somewhat immodest, especially in a country such as England,
where understatement is a way of life.

    Crick, however, was right. Our discovery put an end to a debate as old as
the human species: Does life have some magical, mystical essence, or is it, like
any chemical reaction carried out in a science class, the product of normal
physical/chemical processes? Is there something divine at the heart of a cell
that brings it to life? The double helix answered that question with a
definitive No.

    Charles Darwin's theory of evolution, which showed how all of life is
interrelated, was a major advance in our understanding of the world. The
breakthroughs of the early bacteriologists, Theodor Schwann and Louis Pasteur,
during the second half of the 19th century, were also an important step forward.
But despite these advances, various forms of vitalism - the belief that
physiochemical processes cannot explain life and its processes - lingered on.
Many biologists, reluctant to accept natural selection as the sole determinant
of the fate of evolutionary lineages, had invoked a poorly defined overseeing
spiritual force to account for adaptation. Physicists, accustomed to dealing
with a simple, pared-down world - a few particles, a few forces - found the
messy complexity of biology bewildering. Maybe, they suggested, the processes at
the heart of the cell go beyond the familiar laws of physics and chemistry.

    That is why the double helix was so important. It brought the
Enlightenment's revolution in materialistic thinking into the cell. The
intellectual journey that began with Copernicus displacing humans from the
centre of the universe, and continued with Darwin's insistence that humans are
merely modified monkeys, had finally focused in on the essence of life. And
there was nothing special about it. The double helix is an elegant structure,
but its message is downright prosaic: life is simply a matter of chemistry.

    Crick and I were quick to grasp the intellectual significance of our
discovery, but there was no way we could have foreseen the explosive impact of
the double helix on science and society. Contained in the molecule's graceful
curves was the key to molecular biology, a new science whose progress has been
astounding. Not only has it yielded a stunning array of insights into
fundamental biological processes, but it is now having an ever more profound
impact on medicine, on agriculture, and on the law. DNA is no longer a matter of
interest only to white-coated scientists; it affects us all.

    By the mid-Sixties, we had worked out the basic mechanics of the cell, and
we knew how, via the "genetic code", the four-letter alphabet of DNA sequence is
translated into the 20-letter alphabet of the proteins. The next explosive spurt
in the new science's growth came in the 1970s with the introduction of
techniques for manipulating DNA. We were no longer condemned to watch nature
from the sidelines but could tinker with the DNA of living organisms, and we
could read life's basic script. Extraordinary new scientific vistas opened up:
we would at last come to grips with genetic diseases, from cystic fibrosis to
cancer; we would revolutionise criminal justice through genetic fingerprinting
methods; we would profoundly revise ideas about human origins; and we would
improve agriculturally important species with an effectiveness we had previously
only dreamed of.

    But the climax of the first 50 years of the DNA revolution came on Monday 26
June 2000, with the announcement by the US President Bill Clinton of the
completion of the human genome project: "Today, we are learning the language in
which God created life. With this profound new knowledge, humankind is on the
verge of gaining immense, new power to heal." The genome project was a coming of
age for molecular biology: it had become "big science". Not only was it an
extraordinary technological achievement - the amount of information mined from
the human complement of 23 pairs of chromosomes is staggering - but it was also
a landmark in terms of our idea of what it is to be human. It is our DNA that
distinguishes us from all other species. And here, in its entirety, was that set
of DNA - the human instruction book.

    DNA has come a long way from that Saturday morning in Cambridge. However, it
is also clear the science of molecular biology still has a long way to go.
Cancer still has to be cured; effective gene therapies for genetic diseases
still have to be developed; genetic engineering still has to realise its
phenomenal potential for improving our food. But all these things will come. The
first 50 years of the DNA revolution witnessed a great deal of remarkable
scientific progress as well as the initial application of that progress to human
problems. The future will see many more scientific advances, but increasingly
the focus will be on DNA's ever greater impact on the way we live.

    Extracted from DNA: The Secret of Life' by James Watson (to be published by
Heinemann on 20 March, pounds 20) James Watson 2003

LOAD-DATE: February 27, 2003


                             661 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2003 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                          February 27, 2003, Thursday

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 4,5

LENGTH: 2017 words

HEADLINE: 23 WAYS THAT DNA CHANGED THE WORLD;
 HUMAN DNA, THE MOLECULE OF INHERITANCE, CARRIES THE ENTIRE SET OF

BYLINE: STEVE CONNOR Ethan Hawke in Gattaca', the 1998 film that envisaged a
future of genetically modified superhumans

BODY:


    1 THE SHAPE OF THINGS TO COME

    Two intertwining strands of DNA wrapped around a central axis to form a
gently curving double helix: this instantly recognisable structure is one of the
20th century's most powerful icons. Watson and Crick themselves felt that the
double helix was so simple, so beautiful (it's sometimes described as the "Mona
Lisa" of science), that it had to be right, while its enigmatic symmetry made a
powerful prediction about how genetic information is stored and transmitted from
one generation to the next.

    2 THE GENE EXPLAINED

    For centuries philosophers pondered inheritance and how one person can be an
amalgam of two parents. Cracking the structure of DNA explained how the
fundamental unit of inheritance - the gene - works, and how it is replicated
from one cell to the next and one generation to another. Now that they knew the
molecular basis of the gene, scientists could understand how it can be damaged,
and why such "mutations" can lead to harmful diseases or, occasionally,
beneficial traits that can form the basis of a new trend in evolution.

    3 UNDERSTANDING INHERITED DISEASES

    One of the first inherited diseases to be unravelled at the level of DNA was
sickle-cell anaemia, a blood disorder that affects mostly Africans and natives
of the Mediterranean region - areas badly affected by malaria. A single mutation
in the gene for the blood protein haemoglobin can affect its ability to
transport oxygen around the body. People who inherit two copies of the same
mutation, one from each parent, have severe symptoms. However, those who inherit
just one copy of the mutation do not suffer too badly; in fact, they are
resistant to malaria. The discovery told geneticists much about evolution and
how harmful mutations can increase to relatively high levels within a population
provided they confer some advantage.

    4 CURING INHERITED DISEASES

    By understanding how a gene can go wrong, scientists can work out ways of
putting it right - hopefully. In April 2002, Rhys Evans became the first child
in Britain to be declared cured of an inherited disorder as a result of gene
therapy, which involves "repairing" a defective gene by augmenting it with a
healthy version. Rhys had inherited a defective Gamma C gene from his mother;
this meant that his immune system did not function, making even the most
innocuous infection life-threatening. He had spent his life inside a sterile
"bubble". Then a blood transfusion containing his own, genetically modified
cells corrected the defect and enabled the 18-month-old to play outside with his
friends for the first time in his life.

    5 PREDICTING INHERITED DISEASE

    Some disorders are caused by several genetic defects acting in unison.
Cancer is the classic example: it is caused by a cascade of cellular changes
triggered by a series of mutations. But sometimes cancer can result from a
defect in just one gene that runs in a family, such as the breast-cancer genes
BRAC1 and BRAC2. Understanding this has led to the development of breast-cancer
tests for women whose families carry the gene.

    6 UPHOLDING JUSTICE

    In 1988, Colin Pitchfork was sentenced to life for the killing of a
schoolgirl, Dawn Ashworth, after he became the first murderer to have his DNA
matched to that of a tissue sample at the scene of a crime. What is less well
known is that DNA fingerprinting, as it is known, was also used on another
suspect who had already confessed to the same murder. The test proved that the
confession was false. DNA fingerprints have revolutionised criminal
investigations and have helped to protect the innocent as well as to convict the
guilty.

    7 LOOKING FOR DADDY

    Where would Elizabeth Hurley (left) be without DNA testing? DNA tests on a
child can establish paternity beyond reasonable doubt, even in a case where the
putative fathers are both brothers (although this is not the case with identical
twins, who share the same DNA sequence).

    8 A DOG'S LIFE

    DNA tests are used to confirm the pedigrees of pet dogs and cats, racehorses
and livestock. They can establish the identity of illegally collected bird's
eggs and the hides of protected species.

    9 WHERE WE CAME FROM 1

    DNA analysis supports the view that early humans moved out of Africa less
than 100,000 years ago to colonise the world. DNA has shown that the first
farmers migrated west from the Middle East across Europe. It has helped to
establish when the first humans moved into Australia, reached the Pacific
islands on boats and crossed the ice-locked Bering Strait into the uninhabited
North American continent.

    10 WHERE WE CAME FROM 2

    DNA tests on ancient bones have shown that Neanderthal man and modern humans
are not closely related. Scientists now believe that Neanderthals, who lived
alongside modern humans for thousands of years, never interbred with their close
cousins. DNA tests on living people have revealed other ethnic and ancestral
origins that have been lost over time. The ancestors of many Icelandic women
came from Ireland rather than Norway. Many British Afro-Caribbean men inherited
their male Y chromosomes from white ancestors who were alive at the time of the
slave trade.

    11 EGYPTIAN MUMMIES AND RUSSIAN TSARS

    DNA tests on members of the British Royal Family helped to confirm that
human remains buried in a pit in Russia were those of Tsar Nicholas II and his
family, executed in 1918 by Soviet officials in the basement of a house in
Ekaterinburg. Archaeologists use DNA tests to establish the family relationships
of other long-dead people, from Egyptian pharaohs (below) to the mummified
remains of Mayan and Incan nobility.

    12 THE MYTH OF RACE

    Analysis of DNA has given racial stereotypes a battering - once you get to a
molecular level, even the biological concept of race begins to look meaningless.
When scientists studied the DNA of Israeli Jews and Arabs - two groups
culturally separated by religion and ethnicity - they discovered a genetic
affinity that could only be explained by a close relationship in the relatively
recent past. In fact, human DNA shows surprisingly small variation between the
races. The similarity of DNA sequences across the globe indicates that the human
species has passed through a "genetic bottleneck", the result of the relatively
small number of people - perhaps numbering no more than a few thousand - who
initially migrated out of Africa.

    13 CLEAN MEDICINES

    The protein Factor 8 is one of a number of clotting agents, naturally
occurring in a healthy person's blood, that stops them bleeding to death if they
cut or bruise themselves. Twenty years ago haemophiliacs - who lack the protein
because of a defective gene - relied on transfusions of Factor 8 from blood
donors. As a result, many contracted viral infections such as hepatitis and HIV
from contaminated donors. Now it is possible to make virus-free Factor 8
artificially, using genetically engineered microbes. Other genetically
engineered medicines, such as insulin and human growth hormone, have also
liberated patients from the spectre of contamination.

    14 ONCOMOUSE

    In the 1980s, a genetically modified mouse with a cancer-causing gene became
the first living creature to be caught up in the bitter row about the rights and
wrongs of animal patenting. Oncomouse was important to science because it was
genetically predetermined to develop cancer - and anything that delayed or
prevented this destiny might be useful for anti- cancer treatments. The debate
it caused continues to this day, as more laboratory animals are genetically
engineered for biomedical research.

    15 FEEDING THE WORLD - OR NOT

    The first experiments with genetically modified crops took place in the
1980s. Since then, DNA manipulation has enabled scientists to insert genes into
plants that confer resistance to pests and herbicides, as well as improving the
nutritional content of staple crops - such as rice enriched with beta-carotene.
America and China are both planting thousands of square miles of land with GM
crops, but Europe is still questioning whether this is an agricultural
revolution too far. Like it or not, however, GM food is changing the world.

    16 MANUFACTURING DEATH

    An extreme example of genetic engineering is the deliberate manipulation of
a deadly microbe to make it even more infectious or toxic to humans. Last year
scientists made a complete polio virus from scratch using standard laboratory
equipment and DNA reagents ordered over the internet. The virus caused paralysis
and death when injected into mice. And there are real fears that terrorists, or
a rogue state, could manipulate the genes of more deadly agents such as anthrax,
or even smallpox, to make the threat more potent.

    17 DELAYING AGEING

    Understanding the nature of DNA has shed light on the ageing process.
Certain genes are known to prolong the longevity of fruit flies and in 1984
scientists discovered that the enzyme telomerase, which rebuilds the tips of
chromosomes, can extend the life of individual cells. But we're still some way
away from discovering the secret of eternal youth.

    18 THE MEGA-JAB

    A radical approach to immunisation is to inject raw DNA directly into
patients. Tests are already under way to induce immunity to a range of
infections. DNA vaccines could immunise people against a range of infections
simultaneously with just one jab.

    19 THE END OF FREE WILL?

    In 1994, the American murderer Stephen Mobley was sentenced to death, but
his lawyers argued for leniency on the grounds that he came from a criminal
family and had evidently inherited a genetic predisposition to violence. Last
year scientists showed that physically abused boys are more likely to grow up
into antisocial and violent men if they have also inherited a certain version of
a gene on the X chromosome. DNA has more than re-opened the age-old debate of
nature versus nurture; it has virtually eliminated the notion that we are all
born as blank slates.

    20 AN ETHICAL MINEFIELD

    Discovering the nature of inheritance has presented society with a totally
novel set of ethical dilemmas. Should young people be told they have inherited
the gene for Huntington's disease, which will strike them in middle age with a
lethal and debilitating mental disorder that has no cure? Do insurance companies
have the right to access such information? Should parents be able to choose the
sex of their babies based on a DNA test? Why shouldn't families be able to alter
the genes of eggs or sperm to rid their children of genetic disorders? If this
is acceptable, why can't parents genetically engineer their children to improve
"cosmetic" traits such as intelligence, height or sexual attractiveness?

    21 THE HUMAN GENOME

    Writing down the entire sequence of genetic letters that makes up the human
genome would fill a space equivalent to 800 copies of the Bible. The complete
sequence, to be published later this year, is the ultimate book of life. In
effect it is the recipe for making a human being: yet, encoded in the form of
DNA, it can be packed into the nucleus of a microscopic cell.

    22 MOVIE MANIA

    Hollywood has had a lot of fun (and made a lot of money) with the
possibilities inherent in DNA. Jurassic Park addressed the possibility of
bringing dinosaurs back to life by retrieving their preserved DNA from
fossilised mosquitoes; a highly unlikely scenario. Gattaca envisaged a future of
deliberately designed, genetically modified "valids" and the less perfect
"in-valids", whose DNA had been left to the vagaries of fortune. Somehow this
seems a more likely outcome.

    23 VALIDATING DARWIN

    All animals and plants share the same DNA code. Knowing the structure of DNA
and how it encodes genetic information demonstrated that life on Earth has a
common origin. In effect, it proved that Charles Darwin was right when he
suggested that species are descended from a common ancestor. Even if
extraterrestrial life exists, it is highly unlikely to use exactly the same sort
of DNA, which is, in all probability, unique to Earth.

LOAD-DATE: February 27, 2003


                             662 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2003 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                          February 27, 2003, Thursday

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 27

LENGTH: 283 words

HEADLINE: TELEVISION: PICK OF THE DAY

BYLINE: GERARD GILBERT

BODY:


    DOCUMENTARY Z Trouble at the Top (9.50pm BBC2)

    Being hailed as Gordon Ramsey's protege makes a person sound kind of scary,
but the most frightening thing about chef Angela Hartnett (above) are the dark
circles under her eyes - testament to working the sort of hours that would have
a junior doctor throwing in his white coat. Elected to run Ramsay's latest
venture at London's Connaught Dining Rooms, Hartnett is confronted by crustiness
not only in the staff, but also in the regular diners - a bunch so dyed in the
wool, they probably consider Auguste Escoffier a bit of a whippersnapper. But
the Connaught has since proved a hit, which rather denudes this documentary (the
first in a returning series) of some of its suspense. If you loved Jamie's
Kitchen, you'll probably quite like this.

    SCIENCE Z Horizon (9pm BBC2)

    In the early 1990s, gene therapy was seen as the great white hope of medical
science, just about every disease imaginable was going to be scotched by
injecting healthy genetic material into cells. Horizon reveals how the whole
concept was thrown into disrepute when one idea - the introduction of good genes
with the flu virus - led to the tragic death of Jesse Gelsinger (above) in a
safety trail.

    FOOTBALL Z Liverpool vs Auxerre (8pm BBC1)

    These days, Liverpool at home, defending a narrow lead, is borderline
car-crash viewing. Gerard Houllier's team, with its aversion to using the whole
width of the pitch, are in the sort of dire form that cannot be disguised by
last week's lucky win in France. It's perhaps symptomatic that it took defender
Sami Hyypia (above) to score in that Uefa Cup fourth-round, first-leg tie.
Here's the return game.

LOAD-DATE: February 27, 2003


                             665 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2003 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            February 3, 2003, Monday

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 1989 words

HEADLINE: THE MONDAY INTERVIEW: JAMES WATSON - WELCOME TO THE WATSON WONDERLAND:
DNA GENIUS STILL RUFFLES FEATHERS 50 YEARS AFTER EXTRAORDINARY DISCOVERY;
 JAMES WATSON NOBEL PRIZE WINNER

BYLINE: STEVE CONNOR ON LONG ISLAND, NEW YORK James Dewey Watson, who
co-discovered the DNA helix, is an advocate of germ-line gene theory Miriam Chua

BODY:


    NOBODY COULD accuse James Dewey Watson of being a bore. The man who
co-discovered the DNA double helix is an effusive purveyor of outrageous views,
politically incorrect comments and scurrilous gossip.

    At 75, Watson has lost little of the naughty boy reputation he gained 50
years ago when he and Francis Crick made the scientific discovery of the
century.

    To underestimate the size of Watson and Crick's achievement is indeed
difficult. With a blindingly brilliant insight, they had suddenly defrocked the
mysterious unit of inheritance - the gene. Out of that one staggering
breakthrough a whole new era of understanding emerged, not just in molecular
biology and medicine but in the wider field of human nature, psychology and
anthropological origins. If this was not enough, the double helix itself became
an icon of the late 20th century. It was, quite simply, the Mona Lisa of
science.

    Watson was only 25 when he and Crick, then 37, published a short description
of the double helix in the journal Nature on 25 April 1953. In showing that the
molecule of deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) consisted of two intertwining strands
wrapped in a paired helix around a central axis, they had explained one of the
most important mysteries of life.

    As they famously wrote almost as an afterthought at the end of their
article: "It has not escaped our notice that the specific pairing we have
postulated immediately suggests a possible copying mechanism for the genetic
material."

    It was a landmark discovery not least because it made an important
prediction. If one strand of the double helix was chemically the mirror image of
the other then each helix could, when unravelled, form the template for two
further strands to form two further helices.

    Watson and Crick had explained the fundamental basis of inheritance and
other scientists used their double-helix model to explain how genetic
information was passed from one cell to another and from one generation to the
next.

    This led to an understanding of how genes work, why they can go wrong and
how these genetic defects might be corrected. It spawned a new era in modern
medicine with insights into inherited diseases such as sickle cell anaemia and
cystic fibrosis and it opened the way to finding better treatments and cures for
disorders with a strong genetic component, from cancer to Alzheimer's disease.
It was, in the words of the late Sir Peter Medawar, one of Britain's most
eminent thinkers, quite simply "the greatest achievement of science in the 20th
century".

    Today, Watson is the president of the Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory on Long
Island, New York. His imposing office overlooks the pretty woodland slopes that
run down to the yachting playground of the East Coast rich. It is the sort of
view that the Great Gatsby would have enjoyed while hosting a champagne-fuelled
party.

    A large pencil sketch of the double helix hangs over his desk, and an Anna
Kournikova calendar on the adjacent wall testifies to his two other life-long
obsessions - tennis and pretty women.

    Watson has made no secret of his fascination for "girls". When not chasing
the double helix, he was eagerly engaged in life's other great chase. The Double
Helix, his bestselling book describing the events leading up to the discovery,
makes ample references to his pursuits of the au pairs of Cambridge, and his
later autobiography, Genes, Girls and Gamow, further elaborates his sexual
quests.

    The Double Helix was what made Watson infamous. He narrates with an almost
Pepys-like honesty the human side to the scientific discovery.

    The reader is left in no doubt that this was a race and he was determined to
win. Medawar described the characters portrayed by Watson as larger than life,
"like creatures of a Wonderland, all at a strange, contentious, noisy tea party
which make room for him Watson because for people like him, at this particular
kind of party, there is always room".

    The BBC's award-winning docudrama of the double helix story cast Jeff
Goldblum as a young, lanky Watson complete with rolling eyes and a nervous
urgency. Looking back, Watson says that Goldblum's portrayal of him as obsessive
was right, up to a point.

    "Before we found the double helix, it was true that I was the obsessive one
but, the moment we saw the double helix, Francis became obsessive. He saw that
this was going to change the world," says Watson.

    In The Double Helix, Watson describes the other characters in his Wonderland
with merciless candour. Even his famous opening sentence is a minor character
assassination of his close friend: "I have never seen Francis Crick in a modest
mood," he writes.

    On seeing the manuscript Crick did try to stop Harvard University Press from
publishing, but Watson insists that this was purely because Crick thought the
book was too lightweight for such an academic outlet. (Harvard took the advice
and declined, robbing the publisher of a valuable income.)

    "Frankly, everyone who read the book said that I portrayed Francis in a very
flattering way," Watson says. "Francis had been rejected a number of times by
people, you know, and I think it hurt him so he probably didn't want to ..."
says Watson without finishing his sentence. "He was the most remarkable person.
He was a little too bright for most people."

    Much has been made of Watson's cruel descriptions of Rosalind Franklin, the
"dark lady" of DNA who worked with Maurice Wilkins in his lab at King's College
London.

    "Rosy", as Watson then described her, was a brilliant crystallographer who
had produced beautiful X-ray images of the DNA molecule, which Wilkins had shown
to Watson without her knowledge.

    Franklin had clashed with Wilkins many times, a bitter personal dispute that
affected their professional partnership. While the King's team languished,
Watson and Crick pressed ahead with their own model building of the DNA
molecule.

    "There was antipathy between her and Wilkins and we were friends of
Wilkins." Another pause. "Maurice took her a box of chocolates one day. You just
didn't know what would have softened her up," recalls Watson. "I've read
Rosalind's letters, they are letters I could have written. She had a rather
unsentimental view of the world. She thought most people were rather vulgar. She
thought Maurice was so middle class. She was a snob."

    Franklin, who died from ovarian cancer in 1958, four years before Watson,
Crick and Wilkins were awarded the Nobel prize, became a feminist icon in the
1970s when an American author wrote a polemical retort to Watson's The Double
Helix. Many feminists vilified Watson for being so scornful towards Franklin.

    By writing such things as "the best home for a feminist is in another
person's lab", Watson had unwittingly turned Franklin into the Sylvia Plath of
molecular biology, an epitaph that does not fit with reality, according to
Brenda Maddox, Franklin's most recent biographer. Much of what has been said and
written about Franklin's antipathy towards Watson and Crick is a myth, says
Maddox. "There is no evidence that Franklin felt bitter about their achievement
or had any sense of having been outrun in a race that nobody but Watson and
Crick knew was a race," she says. In fact towards the end of her life Franklin
became good friends of the DNA duo, especially Crick, whom she genuinely liked.

    But what is extraordinary, perhaps, is that Watson and Crick had never told
Franklin to her face what they later said from public platforms after her death
- that they could never have achieved their discovery without her work.

    Flushed with success and at the tender age of 28, Watson was given a
professorship at Harvard University, where he ruffled the feathers of the
traditional biologists, the "stamp collectors" who were not aboard the modern
ship of molecular biology.

    One such traditionalist was the evolutionary biologist Edward O Wilson, who
came to regard Watson as an arch enemy. "When he was a young man, in the 1950s
and 1960s, I found Watson the most unpleasant human being I had ever met,"
Wilson writes in his biography.

    Watson radiated contempt in all directions and shunned ordinary courtesy. He
became the "Caligula of biology" and was given licence to say anything that came
to mind because of the greatness of his discovery, says Wilson.

    "Few dared call him openly to account ... for the compelling reason that the
deciphering of the DNA molecule with Francis Crick towered over all that the
rest of us had achieved and could ever hope to achieve."

    In 1968 Watson became director of Cold Spring Harbor and, to the surprise of
some, including Wilson, built it up from an average institute into a world-class
centre of excellence. "I commented sourly to friends that I wouldn't put him in
charge of a lemonade stand," Wilson says. "He proved me wrong."

    Even in his mid-70s, Watson continues to ruffle feathers and delights in
saying outrageous things. I ask him about germ- line gene therapy, the genetic
engineering of sperm and eggs to order to alter the genes of future generations,
which I know he favours.

    "I always draw a laugh when I say that everyone knows the Irish need
improvement," he says, straining to see if someone with an Irish name shares the
joke.

    In Britain and elsewhere germ-line gene therapy and "designer babies" are a
taboo subject, much to Watson's annoyance. "Throughout civilisation people have
tried to make things better and we're suddenly saying this is a way we won't try
and make things better, and that seems almost against human nature," he says.

    An unholy alliance of left-wing ideologues and religious fundamentalists was
blocking any serious discussion of how modern genetics might be used to improve
humans rather than just eliminate disease.

    Watson sees no problem with the idea of changing children's DNA to make them
resistant to HIV or even to improve their intellectual performance by boosting
the memory circuits of the brain - if ever this becomes possible.

    "You know, the only people who say that stupid people don't exist are people
who are not stupid. We know that if we go to homeless people there is an
underclass with a very strong mental disease component. Those people can't pull
themselves together, the brain just won't allow it. So it is not that they are
weak in character, they are seriously unequal," Watson says.

    "People in first-class universities may have brains that work more
efficiently than people who aren't there and if you could help someone, wouldn't
that be nice?"

    Watson hates both social and scientific taboos. "It's almost impossible to
study the genetics of intelligence either in the US or the UK because it is
socially contentious. You can say that the net effect is that it helps to
perpetuate a system where people are dumb."

    Part of the problem was that, before the double helix, genetics was
inextricably linked with the eugenics movement of the 1920s and 1930s.

    "Should Hitler harm us for the next 200 years by saying that we cannot do
genetics? People say to me that you are acting like Hitler'. People have accused
me of being a Nazi just because I won't accept raw evolution, because I wanted
to filter it a little and try to improve the quality of human life," he says.
"We can say that we want to improve human beings genetically but we don't want
to do it by the ways that were attempted in the past."

    With the 50th anniversary celebrations of the double helix in April,
scientists are also planning to publish the final and complete version of the
human genome. It is a fitting tribute to five decades of discovery and one that
Watson will savour. "The book of the DNA sequence would in time be regarded as
more relevant to human life than the Bible.

    "It tells us who we are," he says, adding without a hint of irony: "I've
never read the Bible, so I'm not sure I've missed much."

LOAD-DATE: February 3, 2003


                             676 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2002 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            October 14, 2002, Monday

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 760 words

HEADLINE: SCIENCE & NATURE: UPDATE;
 LARGE MOLECULES, NOBEL PRIZES AND A BREAKTHROUGH IN THE TREATMENT OF
PARKINSON'S DISEASE

BYLINE: Steve Connor

BODY:


    Methods of measuring and studying the large molecules of living organisms
have won this year's Nobel prize in chemistry. Three scientists share the pounds
700,000 prize for their pioneering work on how to carry out the difficult task
of analysing large biomolecules. The work has led directly to breakthroughs in
the diagnosis of malaria and ovarian cancer, as well as ensuring that food is
free of toxic substances.

    The Nobel committee last week announced that half the prize money will be
shared between John Fenn of Virginia Commonwealth University in Richmond and
Koichi Tanaka, of the Shimadzu Corporation in Kyoto, Japan. Both researchers
have worked on the technique of mass spectroscopy. The other half of the prize
goes to Kurt Wuthrich (right) of the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology in
Zurich, who helped to develop the process of nuclear magnetic resonance.

    Studying these large molecules has proven to be difficult because they are
more delicate and cumbersome than the relatively simple molecules of inorganic
chemistry. Fenn developed a method that was based on producing charged particles
of protein in a solution. As water in a droplet evaporated, the protein ions
formed. Eventually, freely hovering protein ions remain, allowing scientists to
estimate their mass by setting them in motion and estimating the time it takes
for them to cover a known distance. Tanaka developed the technique further.
Instead of relying on charged protein ions forming through gradual evaporation,
he blasted the solution with a pulse of laser light, so that the molecules are
freely released. Tanaka was the first to demonstrate the application of laser
light to the study of biological molecules, the Nobel committee says in its
citation.

    The other half of the prize goes to Wuthrich, who made it possible to use
nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) on protein molecules. He developed a general
method of systematically assigning certain fixed points in the protein molecule,
and also a principle for determining the distances between these - vital
elements in calculating the molecule's three-dimensional shape.

    Doctors in the United States have been given the go-ahead to begin patient
trials of a revolutionary gene therapy for Parkinson's disease. The move follows
encouraging results from studies of rats given the treatment. Based on the
findings and other data, the US Food and Drug Administration has approved a
small phase-one clinical trial, to start next year.

    It will be the first time that gene therapy has been used to treat sufferers
of Parkinson's, the incurable degenerative brain disease that causes
uncontrolled trembling and stiffness, and slowness of speech. The therapy works
by "re -setting" the group of brain cells that become overactive in Parkinson's
sufferers.

    Dr Matthew During, professor of molecular medicine at the University of
Auckland, who led the rat experiments, says: "We are very encouraged that in
addition to the effect this therapy has on quieting symptoms... it may arrest or
delay disease progression." The researchers, whose results are reported in
Science, used a modified virus to carry a therapeutic gene into this part of the
brains of rats with Parkinson's. The gene, called GAD, makes a molecule that
inhibits or dampens nerve activity. Tests showed that the GAD gene was inserted
into the rats' DNA successfully and had the desired calming effect. Treated rats
retained more normal function than untreated animals, and their disease did not
progress further.

    Although conventional therapy is usually effective for most symptoms of
Parkinson's, over time many patients become resistant to treatment and develop
disabling side effects.

    Dr Michael Kaplitt, a co-researcher from Weill Cornell Medical College in
New York, says: "Current surgical therapies for such patients attempt to
interrupt this network abnormality by destroying overactive brain areas or
placing DBS (deep brain stimulation) electrodes to quiet these areas. Both of
these treatments, however, have certain limitations and side effects. Our
approach is based on a similar rationale, but we use gene therapy to adjust the
chemical signalling of these brain areas to a more normal setting. This exploits
the best parts of current therapy but makes it more powerful, less invasive and
potentially safer."

    The first trial, led by Dr Kaplitt, is expected to begin within the next few
months. A dozen patients with severe Parkinson's disease will undergo the
treatment at the New York Presbyterian Hospital.

LOAD-DATE: October 14, 2002


                             683 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2002 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            October 4, 2002, Friday

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 1350 words

HEADLINE: ANALYSIS: MEDICAL RESEARCH: DOCTORS STRUGGLE WITH THE ETHICAL DILEMMA
OF GENE THERAPY;
 DESPITE CONTROVERSY AND SETBACKS, THE PIONEERING TREATMENT FOR CONGENITAL
DISORDERS REMAINS A PRIME GOAL OF MEDICAL RESEARCHERS

BYLINE: Charles Arthur Technology Editor Rhys Evans, the first child in Britain
to benefit from gene therapy for immune deficiency Mike Stephens

BODY:


    RHYS EVANS plays like any healthy toddler, having recently celebrated his
second birthday. Yet little more than a year ago his parents were unsure he
would reach his first. Rhys was born with an inherited disease that left him
without an immune system.

    The standard treatment is to find a sibling whose bone marrow can be
transplanted, so the healthy cells can multiply and spark off the immune system.
But Rhys has no siblings, and even that has only a one in three chance of
effecting a cure. Non-family donors can provide marrow, but the success rate is
even lower, and the side -effects can be serious.

    Rhys, however, was lucky. He was successfully given gene therapy by a team
at Great Ormond Street Children's Hospital. They extracted some of his bone
marrow, used a harmless virus to add working immune system genes to the DNA of
those faulty cells, and reimplanted it a few days later. The effects were
dramatic. Since then, three other people in the UK with the disease - called
X-SCID, or X-linked severe combined immune deficiency - have been successfully
treated by the gene therapy team. "Gene therapy was our only real hope," Rhys's
mother, Marie, said yesterday. "It has saved Rhys's life."

    In France, 11 children with X-SCID have received gene therapy treatment
since 1999. All had been well; the future looked promising.

    But on 16 September came the news that some had feared. Doctors at the
Necker hospital in Paris announced that a three-year-old who had received the
gene therapy when six months old had developed leukaemia. And the virus used to
insert the working genes into his DNA was blamed. The French have halted gene
therapy trials to treat X -SCID pending a full investigation. But in Britain,
the trials and treatments of boys like Rhys (the disease only affects boys,
while girls can be carriers) will go on.

    "It's an ethical dilemma," said Professor Norman Nevin, who chairs the Gene
Therapy Advisory Council which met in urgent session yesterday to consider the
ramifications of the French case. "The French investigation into what happened
will take 12 to 18 months. During that time, one could be faced with the
situation where you're presented with children with this illness who don't have
a bone marrow match, who could die in two to three years.

    "To deny gene therapy to them would be unethical, provided the parents are
cognisant of the associated risks."

    Doctors already think they know why the French case occurred and they are
hopeful, even confident, that it is not part of a pattern.

    The reason is that precisely where the working genes are added is a lottery.
The human genome of DNA is about three billion base pairs long, reckoned to
contain about 35,000 genes. Much of it is apparently a sort of genetic
wasteland, without any function we can discern. The virus, with its gene
baggage, inserts itself pretty much randomly among the base pairs. The chances
of it hitting any one gene are small, because the virus is only about 5,000 base
pairs long - about 1/100th the size of the genome.

    There is a chance that it could insert itself into a working gene, and
deactivate it or create problems, said Bobby Gaspar, a consultant immunologist
on the Great Ormond Street team. "Leukaemia is a finite risk of gene therapy
trials. But this and a trial in Science with some mice which was a special case
are the only known occurrences ... The chances are somewhere in the range of 1
in 10 million to 100 million."

    This appears to have been one of those chances. The virus inserted itself
near a gene known as "LmO2", which is important for generating blood cells.
Leukaemia is cancer of the blood, so it seems that the virus may have turned on
the LmO2 gene wrongly. The child is responding to chemotherapy.

    This might look like another blow to gene therapy, which was hyped as the
perfect means of curing almost any illness.

    The first treatment to use it came in September 1990. It was used in the US
on Ashanthi DeSilva, four, who had a condition called ADA, which also affects
the immune system. It appeared to work. Optimism about gene therapy rocketed but
her long-term survival probably had more to do with the drugs she kept taking.

    Hopes for gene therapy at that time were sky high, but the fervour dimmed
when trials produced results that were at best equivocal and at worst negative.
Britain's first gene-therapy operation came in 1993 - the year the advisory
council was set up - on Carly Todd, when she was 17 months old. That proved
disappointing, although Carly is doing well after conventional treatment and a
bone-marrow transplant.

    The low point was in September 1999, when 18-year-old Jesse Gelsinger from
Arizona died four days after starting trials of a gene therapy treatment for an
inherited metabolic disorder. The suspicion was that the virus used to carry the
genes had reacted with other cells in his body; he showed the signs of a severe
immune reaction.

    In the ensuing investigations, American researchers were found to be under
-reporting the "adverse events" (up to and including deaths) of gene therapy. In
the US, funding dried up, and applications to use gene therapy slumped.

    In the UK, the Gene Therapy Advisory Council made its own review of the
evidence, deciding to allow researchers to persist in their pursuit of this holy
grail. Even as the bad news was emerging about Mr Gelsinger, the trials were
starting in France to treat X-SCID.

    And now gene therapy is starting to come out of its long clinical exile, as
a potential, and lasting treatment for illnesses where conventional therapies
are limited or rely on donations that may never arrive. To date, there have been
636 completed, ongoing or pending gene therapy clinical trials worldwide. The
method varies: sometimes the genes are injected into the body directly (as with
Jesse and Ashanthi), or sometimes, as with Rhys and the French children, by
extracting cells, treating them and reinserting them.

    The successes are starting to make their mark. "Five years ago, there were
no successful gene therapies," said Dr Gaspar. "Now, we have cures. X-SCID was
the first, but there have also been successes with ADA, where two children have
been cured in Italy. These are the first steps to gene therapy for a wide range
of diseases."

    CONDITIONS IN THE QUEUE FOR THERAPY

    X-linked SCID

    Severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) linked to defective genes on the X
-chromosome is an inherited disorder affecting boys. These "bubble babies" lack
certain specialised cells of the immune system, making them highly vulnerable to
potentially lethal infections.

    Haemophilia

    A blood-clotting disorder which is also inherited and affects mostly boys.
Gene therapy trials in the US have shown some patients being able to cut down on
medication.

    Chronic granulomatous disease

    This is a group of rare, inherited disorders of the immune system which
results in gene defects in cells called phagocytes, which protect against
infections by engulfing invading bacteria and fungi. The first UK clinical
trials of gene therapies were approved in 2001.

    Cystic Fibrosis

    The most common genetic disease of western Europeans, cystic fibrosis
results in a build-up of sticky mucus in the airways and lungs. Researchers have
had limited success with nasal sprays loaded with genetically- modified viruses
or fatty droplets called liposomes that contain the correct version of the gene.

    Genital organ cancers

    Many cancers of the vulva and cervix are linked with the human papiloma
virus, which causes genital warts. Gene therapy trials are trying to stimulate
the body's immune system to attack these cancers using a genetically modified
form of the vaccinia virus. UK approval was given in 2000.

    Liver cancer

    A trial at the Hammersmith Hospital in London aimed to introduce a tumour
-suppressing gene called p53 into cancer cells in order to stem the spread of
the liver tumour. A modified common cold virus was proposed but the hospital has
since withdrawn its application for approval.

LOAD-DATE: October 4, 2002


                             684 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2002 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            October 4, 2002, Friday

SECTION: TITLE PAGE; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 387 words

HEADLINE: UK CONTINUES GENE THERAPY TRIAL DESPITE FEARS OVER BOY'S LEUKAEMIA

BYLINE: Charles Arthur Technology Editor

BODY:


    BRITAIN DEFIED international opinion last night by going ahead with a gene
therapy treatment for seriously ill children that has been suspended by America
and France over safety fears.

    Government scientists said they faced an "ethical dilemma" after a French
boy given the therapy in 2000 developed "leukaemia-like" symptoms.

    France and the United States said yesterday they were halting trials of the
treatment, which has so far been used successfully worldwide on almost 20 people
with a rare inherited immune deficiency, sometimes called "bubble-boy disease".
It affects babies, who usually fail to survive beyond 12 months without the
therapy.

    But Professor Norman Nevin, who chairs the Gene Therapy Advisory Committee,
said after an all-day meeting that it had been decided that stopping the trials
would cause more fatalities than carrying on, even though the exact cause of the
French child's illness is not known. The child is receiving chemotherapy and is
expected to recover.

    "An investigation will take 12 to 18 months to find out what happened, and
during that time one could be faced with ... children who will die," Professor
Nevin said. "Provided the parents are cognisant of the risks, I think that to
deny patients gene therapy would be unethical."

    There are two such trials underway at Great Ormond Street Hospital, which
celebrated success in April with Rhys Evans, then 18 months old. The disease,
formally known as X-SCID - for X-linked severe combined immunodeficiency - is
the only one where gene therapy has consistently worked.

    The usual treatment is a bone marrow transplant from a sibling, or even a
non -family donor. An extract of the patient's bone marrow is treated with a
virus carrying the genes needed to revive the immune system. The genes are
incorporated into the DNA of the patient's bone marrow, which is reinserted.

    Doctors suspect that in the French case the virus interfered with a gene
needed for blood production, causing symptoms similar to leukaemia. Dr Bobby
Gaspar, consultant immunologist at Great Ormond Street, said the chance of that
was less than one in 10 million.

    "Five years ago there were no successful gene therapies," Dr Gaspar said.
"Now we have cures. This is the first steps to gene therapy for a wide range of
diseases."

LOAD-DATE: October 4, 2002


                             690 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2002 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                           September 6, 2002, Friday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1225 words

HEADLINE: FROM CANCER TO AIDS: THE RNAI REVOLUTION IS GATHERING PACE

BYLINE: Steve Connor Science Editor How The Independent' reported the RNAi
technique; The double-stranded form of RNA has astonishing properties that could
benefit medical science; John Rossi: Plans to use RNAi to help Aids patients

BODY:


    THE DRAMATIC results of early experiments using RNA interference (RNAi) -
showing that it destroys cancer cells in a test tube - have raised an important
question: will the revolutionary technique work on patients?

    Scientists have been astonished by the power of RNAi to neutralise viruses
and cancer cells but there has always been a nagging doubt that it might be just
another test-tube wonder that fails the clinical test.

    With the latest findings showing that RNAi protects human cells against
cancer and lethal viruses, attention will be focussed on John Rossi, a medical
scientist who will soon carry out the world's first clinical trial of the
technique.

    Dr Rossi, a senior scientist at the Beckman Research Institute at the City
of Hope Cancer Centre in Duarte, California, has drawn up preliminary plans to
use RNAi on a group of Aids patients undergoing bone-marrow transplants for
lymphoma, a type of cancer.

    If RNAi works against HIV, there is a good chance it will work against other
incurable diseases. Success would open new avenues to treating many other lethal
viruses, as well as cancer and tissue rejection following transplant surgery.

    The research published yesterday by a team from the University of York
focused on cervical cancer cells.

    Professor Jo Milner's team targeted the RNAi against two of the genes of
human papilloma virus. By silencing one gene, the tumour cells stopped growing.
By silencing the other gene, all the cancer cells committed "suicide".

    Because the treatment had no effect on uninfected human cells, this is
strong evidence that RNAi would be unlikely to produce the harmful side- effects
seen with other cancer treatments. Professor Milner said that she intends to
start clinical trials for cervical cancer treatment within five years. Cervical
cancer kills some 1,250 British women each year.

    The world's first clinical trial with RNAi, however, is likely to take place
on Aids patients in the US. Dr Rossi said that he already has Aids patients
undergoing a similar treatment that could be adapted to incorporate RNAi.

    "We envision within a year, or two at the most, that we'll be able to do the
first RNAi testing in patients because we have the infrastructure already laid
for this kind of therapeutic approach," Dr Rossi said.

    RNAi has become the hottest topic in biology and has already proved itself
as an extraordinarily powerful research tool - geneticists say it will
revolutionise the study of the human genome.

    As The Independent reported last month, RNAi works by "silencing" any chosen
gene. Scientists have shown it can be used to turn off the harmful genes of
infectious viruses or malignant tumour cells.

    Dr Rossi's trial will be a critical first test of RNAi in a practical
setting. A trial is imperative, he said, because of the incredibly persuasive
evidence that RNAi works against HIV.

    When they applied the approach to human cells growing in a test tube, they
could hardly believe their eyes when they found that the cells became 10,000
times better at resisting attack by HIV. "Normally when we do this sort of
experiment we are lucky if we get 90 per cent inhibition with even the best
things we put in," he said.

    "This time we got the most substantial inhibition we've every seen with any
gene therapy approach."

    His research institute, sited 26 miles north-east of Los Angeles, will need
to receive ethical approval from the US regulatory authorities. But first Dr
Rossi will have to conduct a series of safety experiments on animals, which will
be paid for by the government's National Institutes of Health.

    The trial will involve extracting stem cells from patients' bone marrow and
genetically engineering them with synthetic genes that cause the cells to
produce short, double-stranded molecules of RNA, a close relation of DNA.

    These RNA molecules are known to interfere with the way other genes work and
they can be specifically made to target harmful genes, such as those that are
vital for HIV or a tumour cell to replicate.

    In theory RNAi should be safe because not only is it a natural process for
silencing genes, buy it can be made to be specific to genes carried solely by
viruses or cancer cells.

    However, Dr Rossi said that ethical committees will demand extensive safety
data from the animal studies before allowing the technique to be used on
patients. "This will definitely turn out to be very powerful, the only question
is safety," he said.

    The animal studies will have to show that genetically engineered stem cells
honed by RNAi to silence certain critical genes of the Aids virus are themselves
not altered by the process. In particular the scientists will have to show that
the stem cells can still go on to differentiate into healthy blood cells in the
normal way.

    Phillip Sharp, a Nobel laureate who is working on RNAi at the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, has also shown that the technique can suppress HIV in
human cells. However, the Rossi group did it by genetic engineering rather than
adding short segments of double-stranded RNA to cells.

    "We actually engineer the cells to produce RNAi that's targeted to HIV and
we showed we can get remarkable protection, but that was in a short- term
experiment," he said.

    "We were one of the first groups to report that you can express short RNAs
in human cells and get them to knock out HIV. So instead of putting it in from
the outside, like the Phil Sharp group, we expressed them from the inside of the
cells."

    Dr Sharp has set up a company called Alnylam - which is Arabic for "string
of pearls" - to develop RNAi using $ 17m (pounds 12m) of venture capital. He too
has little doubts about its potential: "This is really exciting and it's
captured the imagination of just about the total worldwide biological community.
This is the broadest, most general advance that I have known of for a long
period."

    Dr Sharp has become one of RNAi's most fervent admirers. "It's one of the
more interesting and exciting developments over the last decade," he said.

    "We didn't have before this a general method of turning genes off. Now there
is a method that can turn genes off by your design, not the cell's design. I
think that's a very important, general concept."

    Sir Paul Nurse, another Nobel laureate and the director general of Cancer
Research UK, said that RNAi offers great potential, but he stressed that the
research was still at an early stage.

    "When we come to therapy it's very much more difficult to know how much more
effective it's going to be. There is clear promise but I think it's still a bit
early to know," Sir Paul said.

    "In terms of a method for treating disease, it has clear potential but I
think we have to see how it works out. The real difficulty is delivering these
agents adequately and appropriately.

    "I'm sure you can think about clinical trials and I'm sure they will happen
and indeed should happen if they are shown to be safe and promising, but we
shouldn't think that this is absolutely the panacea we've been looking for.

    "It might be absolutely fantastic or it might not turn out to be as easy as
we think."

    Dr Sharp, meanwhile, is hoping that Dr Rossi's clinical trial works out as
intended. "It would be exciting if he could do it. I wish him luck."

LOAD-DATE: September 6, 2002


                             693 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2002 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            July 31, 2002, Wednesday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 486 words

HEADLINE: STEM CELL DISCOVERY RAISES PROSPECT OF TREATING GENETIC DISORDERS IN
THE WOMB

BYLINE: Steve Connor Science Editor

BODY:


    THE PROSPECT of treating genetic disorders in three-month-old foetuses came
a step closer yesterday with a study showing gene therapy might be possible
inside the womb of a pregnant woman.

    A team of British scientists has identified stem cells - the "master" cells
of the body - that circulate in the blood of a developing foetus and that can be
engineered easily using gene therapy.

    The findings suggest it might be possible to extract the stem cells of an
early foetus with a genetic defect, insert a correct gene into the cells in the
laboratory and inject them back into the embryo to correct the abnormality.

    Professor Nick Fisk, of Imperial College, London, who led the team, said
early tests had shown it was possible to engineer the so-called mesenchymal stem
cells found in foetal blood with a success rate of 99 per cent. "It raises the
concept or idea that we may be able to collect these mesenchymal stem cells in
the first three months of pregnancy," Professor Fisk said yesterday.

    "The big advantage of these stem cells is that they are circulating in the
blood of the foetus so it may be possible to take them out, stick in a normal
gene to replace the gene that is not working, and put them back at an early
enough stage of development that they can be taken up by the foetus without fear
of rejection.

    "The great advantage is that because you're taking them out of the same
foetus you are putting them back into, you're not going to suffer from the
problems of tissue rejection."

    Stem cells are invaluable tools because they have the power of developing
into a range of fully specialised tissues, such as muscles, bones or nerves.

    Mesenchymal stem cells are half-way between the stem cells of early embryos
- which can develop into any tissue of the body - and adult stem cells, which
seem to be more restricted in the range of tissues they can become, Professor
Fisk said.

    In the tests on human mesenchymal stem cells taken from early foetuses, the
scientists engineered them with a gene for a protein that lights in the dark to
see how many could be successfully altered in the laboratory using a virus to
inject the gene into the cell. The 99 per cent success rate was better than
previous attempts at gene therapy using different kinds of stem cells, the
researchers report in the Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology.

    There are many genetic disorders that could benefit from this approach, such
as muscular dystrophy and a range of hereditary bone diseases where early
treatment in the womb might prevent the disability from being severe.

    But Professor Fisk emphasised that it would take at least five years, and
more likely 10 years, before the approach could lead to the first clinical
trials. The procedure would mostly benefit families with a history of inherited
disorders and where there is a high risk of a baby being affected by the
abnormal gene.

LOAD-DATE: July 31, 2002


                             702 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2002 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                             June 28, 2002, Friday

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 1238 words

HEADLINE: ANALYSIS GENETIC DISEASE: GENE THERAPY COMES OF AGE WITH THE SAVING OF
A LITTLE GIRL'S LIFE;
 INTERNATIONAL TEAM OF DOCTORS USES REVOLUTIONARY TECHNIQUES TO CURE AN
INHERITED IMMUNE SYSTEM DISORDER THAT WOULD HAVE BEEN FATAL

BYLINE: Steve Connor Science Editor

BODY:


    AN INTERNATIONAL team of doctors passed another milestone in medical history
yesterday, curing a two-year-old girl of an inherited disorder of the immune
system using revolutionary gene therapy.

    The girl, an Arab-Israeli called Salsabil from Jerusalem, was born without
an immune system and would almost certainly have died within months of birth
without the treatment. Now she is normal and healthy, in effect cured of one of
the most feared genetic diseases.

    Her survival is living testament to the growing realisation that gene
therapy may have come of age after many years of false hopes. Doctors throughout
the world are growing increasingly confident about the future of gene therapy, a
technique where "healthy" genes are injected into a patient to replace their
defective DNA.

    Salsabil was born in February 2000 into a family with a history of a gene
disorder known as severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID), often called bubble
baby syndrome because victims must be kept in a sterile environment.

    One of Salsabil's siblings had died of the disease and an older sister,
Tasmin, had survived only after a transplant of blood cells from the umbilical
cord of a younger, unaffected brother. Unfortunately for Salsabil, there were no
suitable donors for either a bone-marrow transplant or for stem cells from the
umbilical cord blood. At seven months of age doctors decided gene therapy was
the only option.

    The team was led by Professor Shimon Slavin, Shoshana Morecki and Memet Akar
of the Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical Centre in Jerusalem. They worked with
Claudio Bordignon and colleagues at the San Raffaele Institute for Gene Therapy
in Milan.

    Israeli surgeons extracted bone marrow from Salsabil and mingled the cells
with a genetically engineered virus containing a healthy copy of the affected
gene. The virus, engineered to be harmless, automatically injects the human gene
directly into the nucleus of the bone-marrow cells.

    Before the doctors transfused the bone marrow back into Salsabil, they
performed a radical procedure to increase the chances of the technique working.
They subjected Salsabil to a mild form of chemotherapy - called non
-myeloblative conditioning - to suppress her defective bone marrow cells and
prepare the ground for the transfused cells to multiply.

    Dr Bordignon said: "Non-myeloblative conditioning means you don't really
wipe out the bone marrow, you just give one of the drugs used for a transplant,
at a much lower dose, to make space' for engineered marrow to seize, expand and
grow better."

    It worked. Within weeks of having a transfusion of her own marrow, Salsabil
began to show signs of recovery. The infused stem cells migrated naturally to
her bone marrow and began making several of the key cells of the immune system,
such as the white blood cells known as B and T lymphocytes. Within months,
Salsabil began making her own antibodies for the first time, when before she had
to rely on those in her mother's milk. She responded normally to a tetanus
vaccine and even survived chickenpox.

    Within a year she had shrugged off the respiratory infections, chronic
diarrhoea and scabies that had plagued her since birth. She was allowed home and
needed no treatment. She was effectively cured of a disease written in her
genes.

    "I would call this a cure," Professor Slavin said. "We have achieved 100 per
cent replacement of her defective bone marrow cells. She is a cute little girl.
The concept can be applied to all genetic diseases where there is a need to
engineer stem cells to produce normal products, especially when patients have no
matched donor available for safe bone marrow transplantation."

    It is not the first time that doctors have cured SCID children with gene
therapy, but it is the first time a child has been cured of such a complex form
of the disease. Salsabil suffered from a lack of an enzyme called adenosine
deaminase (ADA), which results in a number of abnormalities of the immune system
and is considered the most complex and most difficult SCID to treat.

    W French Anderson of the University of Southern California, who was the
first to try to treat ADA deficiency by gene therapy, said yesterday the Italian
-Israeli study was an important advance for the entire concept of gene therapy.

    "This gives a boost to the whole field because it proves our basic premise,
that if you can get enough gene- engineered cells into the patient it will cure
the disease," he said. "That is very important and this is very exciting."

    It was not always so. After the initial hype that heralded the first gene
therapy attempt by Dr Anderson in 1990, the prognosis did not look good. Gene
therapy alone did not cure in the way it was meant to and two little girls -
Ashanthi deSilva and Carly Todd, the first gene therapy patients in America and
Britain respectively - had to rely on more conventional treatment to survive.

    "There was initially a great burst of enthusiasm that lasted three, four
years where a couple of hundred trials got started all over the world," Dr
Anderson said. "Then we realised that nothing was really working at the clinical
level."

    The worst moment came in September 1999 when an American patient called
Jesse Gelsinger died after a gene therapy injection into his liver. No one knows
for certain why he died, but it may have been linked to the virus used in the
experimental procedure.

    It was a development that was carefully monitored by Britain's gene therapy
advisory committee, experts responsible for overseeing all UK gene therapy
trials. Scientists had to redouble their efforts to ensure the safety of any
viruses used in the many and varied trials, which included attempts at treating
cancer with genetically modified cells as well as treatments for some of the
4,000 or so inherited disorders caused by a single defective gene, from cystic
fibrosis to haemophilia.

    Finally, in April 2000, scientists in France reported their first
unequivocal success with gene therapy - on children with another form of SCID.
This year, doctors at the Institute of Child Health at Great Ormond Street
Hospital in London reported similar success on an 18-month-old called Rhys Evans
who had an SCID caused by a defect in the "gamma c" gene.

    Today Rhys is a healthy two-year-old with no signs of the inherited disorder
that had confined him to the solitary world of an antiseptic hospital room. Like
Salsabil, he mixes freely with other children - an activity that might have
killed them both before the treatment - and he now lives the normal life of any
toddler. Adrian Thrasher, the consultant immunologist at Great Ormond Street who
treated Rhys, said the research from Jerusalem was very encouraging for the
treatment of immunodeficiency by gene therapy. He hopes the treatment may now be
extended to cover other inherited illnesses. "There are more than 4,000 genetic
conditions, and at least 80 different immune diseases alone," he said. "The
technique will have to be worked out for each individual condition."

    Treating diseased cells in the bone marrow is technically easier than
treating the defective genes of, say, nerve tissue or heart muscle.

    Although gene therapy has now proved effective in curing one or two
diseases, nobody can yet be sure that such treatment can be made to work in each
of the thousands of genetic disorders affecting children.

LOAD-DATE: June 28, 2002


                             703 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2002 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                             June 28, 2002, Friday

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 348 words

HEADLINE: THE CHILDREN WHO ARE FORCED TO LIVE THEIR ENTIRE LIVES IN A BUBBLE;
 BORN WITHOUT AN IMMUNE SYSTEM David Vetter: The bubble boy' made famous by Paul
Simon

BODY:


    BABIES BORN without immune systems quickly become ill during weaning when
the protection of their mother's milk - which contains maternal antibodies -
begins to wear off. Without transplant medicine of some kind, the only way of
keeping these children alive is to cocoon them in a sterile environment free of
potentially lethal microbes.

    In the Sixties and Seventies, hospitals put babies with severe combined
immune deficiency (SCID) in plastic "bubbles" where the the air is filtered and
direct contact with the outside world is minimised.

    One of the most famous of these so-called "bubble babies" was a Houston boy,
David Vetter, who spent 12 years of his life inside a plastic sphere aerated
with filtered air. He became known as "David the bubble boy", and his
predicament was made famous in a song by Paul Simon. David Vetter died in 1984
when, at his insistence, doctors tried a bone-marrow transplant.

    Since then, transplant operations have improved, provided that doctors can
find suitably matched donors of either bone marrow or stem cells from umbilical
cord blood. The drugs used to fight the opportunistic infections that normal
babies usually shrug off are also better than they were.

    At Great Ormond Street Hospital in London, doctors house SCID babies in
cubicles where the air is filtered and put under a slight positive pressure, to
prevent outside air seeping in. One or two doctors or nurses, with either the
mother or the father, can join the baby in his or her sterile world.

    Improved antibiotics sometimes allow these children to go home for limited
periods, but they are not allowed to mingle freely with their siblings or other
children.

    Even though they are not "bubble babies" in the traditional sense of the
phrase, they are still isolated from the rest of the world and as they grow up
they are denied the social interaction that other children take for granted.

    Now that gene therapy has been proved to work with SCID babies, there is
hope that the prospect of growing up in a "bubble" will be consigned to medical
history.

LOAD-DATE: June 28, 2002


                             706 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2002 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                              June 7, 2002, Friday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 66 words

HEADLINE: OXFORD BIOMEDICA IN PUSH ON ANAEMIA DRUG

BODY:


    OXFORD BIOMEDICA, the gene therapy company, said preclinical results for a
new anaemia product, Repoxygen, had been successful and that it was a step
nearer to bringing the drug to market. "The data for Repoxygen are excellent and
we are considering the clinical development of the product, probably with a
partner," Alan Kingsman, the chief executive, said. The shares gained 1p to 22p.

LOAD-DATE: June 7, 2002


                             707 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2002 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                             May 28, 2002, Tuesday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 414 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY OFFERS HOPE TO INFERTILE COUPLES

BYLINE: Charles Arthur

BODY:


    SCIENTISTS HAVE offered hope to infertile couples by successfully replacing
faulty genes in mice with working ones. The researchers from America and Japan
have proposed that their technique could now be used for people.

    Up to 20 per cent of couples around the world are believed to be infertile,
of which between 30 and 50 per cent of cases are due to the male partner - and
the failure there is almost always due to flaws that have a genetic origin.

    But in their experiments, the team discovered that by including working
genes and attaching them to a form of virus called a "lentivirus" - which
inserts its own DNA into that of its host - they could restore non-functioning
cells to health.

    The mice were then able to produce sperm, and by using an implantation
method called intrcytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI), which is already used in
humans, five male mice were able to father 390 mice pups.

    Most importantly, the pups did not carry any of the genes from the
lentivirus. That indicates the therapy would appear to be safe, even though it
comes perilously close to so-called germ-line gene therapy, in which the
technique could be used to change the inheritance of a person.

    A spokeswoman for the Human Fertilisation and Embryology Authority (HFEA),
which would have to license any use of the technology in humans, said: "We will
watch this with the greatest interest, but it's a huge leap to go from early
animal studies to asking what the effects would be in humans. We would probably
not object in principle, but we have to look at every application to use this
method individually."

    The key to the technique's success is that it does not pass on the
"inserted" DNA from the lentivirus, even though it is acting on cells that help
to generate the sperm.

    Germ-line gene therapy is outlawed because of its potential risks -
scientists are still uncertain whether such changes would be stable, and whether
the virus DNA used to add the changes would be safe if it passed on to the
descendants of those treated.

    The new system appeared to be safe, said the team from the Laboratory of
Genetics at the Salk Institute in La Jolla, California, and the Institute of
Physical and Chemical Research at Tsukuba, Japan.

    But in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences today they note
that "further large-scale and detailed studies may be required, because it is
difficult to totally rule out the possibility of germ- line transmission".

LOAD-DATE: May 28, 2002


                             726 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2002 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            April 4, 2002, Thursday

SECTION: Education; Pg. 20, 21

LENGTH: 1583 words

HEADLINE: HIGHER EDUCATION: 'IT IS VITAL THAT IMPERIAL IS RUN AS A; UNIVERSITY
BUSINESS';
 SIR RICHARD SYKES, A CAPTAIN OF INDUSTRY, IS REORGANISING BRITAIN'S SCIENCE
POWERHOUSE ALONG CORPORATE LINES, SAYS LUCY HODGES

BYLINE: Lucy Hodges Sir Richard Sykes below the college tower (above) and in his
office; (top left) David Sandison

BODY:


    An important revolution is taking place at Imperial College, London,
Britain's powerhouse of science, technology, engineering and medicine. Its new
rector, Sir Richard Sykes, 59, the man who created GlaxoSmithKline, the world's
biggest pharmaceuticals company, is restructuring the college along corporate
lines. If anybody can make Imperial into a big global player, it is Sir Richard.
Having spent a lifetime in the drug industry, much of it in America, he knows
how to build a successful international organisation. And that is what he is
doing.

    Out has gone the old academic hierarchy of 35 departments reporting to the
top dog; in have come four streamlined faculties with responsibilities devolved
to four men (for they are all men). Goodbye fuddy-duddy academia; hello
efficient, smart Britain.

    "Having 35 people reporting to you is not the way to operate if you want to
have something running efficiently," says Sir Richard. "What you tend to get
with 35 departments is that everything goes up to the rector and comes back down
again. So, the rector gets involved in every decision. It's not the way to do
it. This place needs to be run as a business, not a commercial, but a university
business."

    There is nothing new about restructuring universities. Sir Richard is doing
other things, too, in his plan to transform Imperial College into an effective
player on the global higher education scene. He now has committees that can make
decisions about the whole college rather than just bits of it. Six of the top
officers' jobs have new occupants. There's a new finance director, a new
director of ICT, a new estates director, a new development director, a new human
resources director and a new director of corporate and public affairs.

    Sir Richard makes no apology for it. "In universities you have an academic
function and you have an administrative function," he says. "And you cannot run
places like this without professional administrators. You need people who have
been brought up to run these kinds of businesses."

    Established in 1907, Imperial is a big business with a turnover of pounds
400m a year. It also has an outstanding reputation academically. Its mission is
to remain one of the best teaching and research institutions in the world,
according to Sir Richard. That means it has to attract the best students and
staff internationally. That, in turn, means it has to pay staff competitively
and help bright students financially. Sir Richard should know how to raise
money. He knows other big industrialists and he knows their businesses. If he
can't persuade industry to invest in the kind of higher education that produces
wealth-creating research, no one can.

    Imperial announced last year that it was paying its lecturers over the odds
(lecturers receive a minimum of pounds 28,603 and professors a minimum of pounds
45,000, which is more than the national rates). It is also planning to set up
scholarship schemes. All of which will require substantial sums of money. The
abolition of maintenance grants puts people off going to university, says Sir
Richard. "I came from a poor background," he explains. "My parents paid not a
penny for my university education. If I had had to pay I probably wouldn't be
here."

    The new rector has set up an office of public and corporate affairs, which
will be raising funds from as many sources as possible - from industry, alumni,
from consulting work and spin-out companies (the college already has 55 such
companies). "If we compete on the international stage we have got to be able to
compete with those universities that have large endowments that give them
incredible flexibility," he says.

    The new rector looks across the Atlantic with some envy. Americans give to
their universities in a big way, he points out. Building up endowments in
Britain is much more difficult. The pounds 27m gift that is transforming
Imperial's business school came from an American alumnus, Gary Tanaka.

    "In America they say, 'right, we now want to go into systems biology, we're
going to build a facility for pounds 300m and we're going to put those people in
it.' We can't do that. The difference I have found between industry and academia
is this terrible lack of funding. You're constantly scraping around for the last
penny to do something."

    Imperial College does brilliantly in research: it came second after
Cambridge in The Independent's league table of research ratings in December
2001. Among the cognoscenti it is highly rated. In the wider world Imperial is
not so well known, but it outperformed Oxford in the research league table?

    Sir Richard is well aware that he needs to burnish its brand image. "We have
a whole campaign now to do to develop the brand," he says. "We're looking at the
brand, deciding how we will brand ourselves. If we are going to develop major
fund-raising we need to get the brand out there. If you went out to Kensington
High Street and stopped six people and said 'do you know anything about Imperial
College,' they probably wouldn't."

    The new rector is an exquisitely tidy man who has an office that gleams with
cleanliness. One feels he has an equally tidy mind. It is a surprise to learn
that he left school at 16, having found lessons boring (he studied for his A
-levels at night school). But once he had become intellectually engaged, he
never looked back. After achieving a first-class degree at London University, he
moved to Bristol to do a PhD and became an academic before jumping ship to Glaxo
at the age of 30.

    When he became chief executive of Glaxo in the Nineties, he showed
breathtaking audacity in launching a successful takeover of Wellcome. Takeovers
are not on the cards at Imperial. Sir Richard is expected to concentrate on
building the college up to be London University's heavy hitter. The business
school is an important part of his game plan. Imperial's graduates need to know
about the world of business, about entrepreneurship and balance sheets, he says.
In the past they didn't.

    By all accounts, the new rector's restructuring of departments into four
faculties of life - science, medicine, engineering and physical sciences - has
not been popular with all academics. Sir Richard has a reputation for toughness
and there is talk that he has not carried all the academic staff with him. Sir
Richard, however, says it won "total support" from senior managers. People
recognised the need for change, he says. "They are smart. They recognised that
the whole sector had started to change dramatically."

    The restructuring means that individual departments may lose out. With a
subject such as mathematics, which in its pure form is about blue-sky research,
it is not always easy to see results. With biological sciences and other
subjects - which have brought us the Human Genome Project and gene therapy - it
is. The fear of some departments must be that they will suffer financially and
politically from being consigned to jockeying for position alongside other
departments within their faculty.

    The new rector has plenty of fans cheering him on, however. "We need more
Richard Sykeses at the top of our higher education institutions to bring
additional business expertise," says Richard Brown, director of the Council for
Industry and Higher Education.

    Unsurprisingly, Sir Richard advocates much more of a free market system for
UK universities. "That's what will bring the competition and drive excellence,"
he says. "If we just say to students, 'you can go to any university and we will
pay for you,' we will still have 148 universities in this country and I'm not
sure we need them. We're a small country."

    The UK must charge students full-cost fees, he says. (At present university
education is subsidised, even for those who pay the pounds 1,075 flat-rate fee.)
That may appear to contradict his view that poor students need grants, but what
he would like is for British universities to follow the US model.

    The transparency review carried out by the Higher Education Funding Council
shows that British universities teach at a loss and conduct research at a loss.
"Everything we do is loss-making and it's just crazy," he says. "If we could
charge the full economic cost for teaching and research, then universities would
be a lot healthier."

    l.hodges@independent.co.uk


    AN OPERA LOVER'S RECORD OF ACHIEVEMENT

    Born: 7 August, 1942, Huddersfield

    Education: Royds Hall Grammar School, Huddersfield. Undergraduate degree in
microbiology at Queen Elizabeth College, London. PhD at Bristol University.

    First job: Pathology lab technician, which he did before A-levels and before
university

    Work history after university: Joined Glaxo Research in 1972 but didn't
enjoy it so went to work for Squibb. Rejoined Glaxo in 1986 as R&D director.
Became Glaxo chief executive. Engineered merger with Wellcome in 1995 and became
non -executive chairman of GlaxoSmithKline. Gave that post up at the end of May
2002.

    Other positions: Sits on Clare Short's committee, which is looking at access
by the Third World to drugs; Trustee of the Natural History Museum.

    Earns: up to pounds 200,000 a year at Imperial.

    Appearance: Extremely tidy. His desk has very little on it.

    Likes: Opera.

    Dislikes: Mess and "the nanny state"

    Sports: A keen skier and swimmer. He skies at Val d'Isere where he owns "a
place". He doesn't swim in South Kensington as the local pool is "too
chlorinated".

    LH

LOAD-DATE: April 09, 2002


                             727 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2002 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            April 4, 2002, Thursday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1313 words

HEADLINE: DOCTORS CLAIM A FIRST GENETIC 'CURE' FOR RHYS, THE BOY IN THE BUBBLE

BYLINE: Steve Connor Science Editor Rhys Evans, an 18-month-old, benefited from
groundbreaking genetic therapy to 'cure' him of a rare immune system disorder
Mike Stephens

BODY:


    THIS TIME last year, baby Rhys Evans was struck down with pneumonia and
needed a ventilator to breathe. Suffering from a rare inherited disorder that
had robbed him of a working immune system, Rhys had to live in an ultra-sterile
hospital room cut off from the outside world.

    Today, the 18-month-old toddler is like any other little boy of his age -
full of mischief and fun, with an insatiable desire to run around whenever he
can. He lives at home and shows no signs he was once so ill.

    Doctors at Great Ormond Street Hospital said yesterday Rhys is living proof
gene therapy works. Some of them went as far as to say he has been cured - the
first gene therapy patient to receive that accolade in Britain, and only the
second gene therapy "cure" worldwide.

    "We're very pleased to announce the successful cure of the first patient in
the UK by gene therapy," said Professor Christine Kinnon, director of the Centre
of Gene Therapy for Childhood Diseases at the Institute of Child Health in
London, who collaborated on treatment.

    It is rare for doctors to use the "c" word. Cures are meant to be permanent
and, although Rhys shows every sign he is now normal, there is still a risk he
may relapse, making him once again vulnerable to the opportunistic infections
that strike someone with a compromised immune system.

    Indeed, Adrian Thrasher, the consultant paediatric immunologist at the Great
Ormond Street Hospital who carried out the treatment was more cautious. "I'd
like to say that Rhys is cured but we can't say that," he said.

    "Rhys will be followed up for years and years. Only in the long term will we
really be able to compare what we've done to Rhys with our other patients who've
been through more conventional transplant procedures," he added.

    The first signs that something was wrong with Rhys came four months after
his birth at about the time when his mother, Marie, began to stop breastfeeding.
A series of chest infections quickly turned into severe pneumonia which led to
10 days in an oxygen tent before being put on a ventilator.

    After a series of tests, the problem was finally identified. Rhys had
acquired a defective gene on the X-chromosome - inherited from his mother. It
meant he could not produce the vital lymphocytes - a type of white blood cell -
essential for his immune system.

    Medically, the condition is called X-linked Severe Combined Immunodeficiency
(X -SCID). The more popular name is "baby in the bubble" syndrome, because of
the sterile plastic spheres used to protect some babies with the disorder.

    An analysis of Rhys's blood showed the few lymphocytes he possessed came
from his mother and the supply had been cut off when breastfeeding ended.

    Marie Evans, 31, remembers the pit of despair she and her husband faced
knowing their little boy was so ill. Mrs Evans said yesterday: "Life was a bit
of a rollercoaster. One day we could be up and the other day we could be down."

    Mark, her husband, gave up his job to care for Rhys and he suffered badly
from depression and anxiety. Mr Evans said: "If you'd seen how bad he was. He
was skin and bone, too weak to hold his head up."

    When Rhys regained enough strength, he was transferred from the South Wales
hospital to a sterile room at Great Ormond Street. Doctors soon began the search
for a bone marrow donor. It was the one source of hope for Rhys who did not have
a brother or sister to act as a tissue-matched donor.

    For the past 20 years or more, bone marrow transplants have been an
effective treatment for disorders of the blood and immune system. But without a
suitable match, a transplant was impossible.

    Mrs Evans said: "We were told one day there wasn't a match in the UK, we
looked worldwide and we were told there was an American donor and the next day
we were given the opportunity of gene therapy."

    The first stage of the operation was simple enough. Under a general
anaesthetic, doctors extracted bone marrow cells from Rhys and froze them.

    They genetically engineered a mouse retrovirus - a type of virus with a
natural capacity to inject genetic material into the chromosomes of a cell - so
that it possessed a healthy copy of the human "gamma c" gene that Rhys lacked.

    Scientists connected a bag containing the genetically modified virus to a
bag of Rhys's bone marrow. The hope was that the virus would mingle with the
bone marrow cells and inject the healthy gene into the stem cells.

    Mingling completed, the doctors then transfused the marrow back into Rhys
last summer in a painless procedure similar to a blood transfusion. There was
then an agonising period when both parents and doctors waited to see whether it
had worked.

    By Christmas, the toddler was showing signs of getting well. Two months
later, his lymphocyte count shot up to almost normal levels. For the first time
in his short life, Rhys was able to start mixing with other children and playing
outdoors.

    Dr Thrasher said: "Rhys has a normal immune system, he's thriving, he's
normal . We were enormously relieved. We were ecstatic. We've been working on
gene therapy for many years in the laboratory and it's great to be able to take
that work into the clinic and see some therapeutic success."

    The first gene therapy trial took place in the US in September 1990. Since
then about 500 trials worldwide have been done - with little success. Although
there are risks with gene therapy Dr Thrasher believes it is safer than
conventional bone marrow transplants which often involve chemotherapy.

    "The procedure is incredibly safe. We've seen no side-effects at all in
either of the patients. The risk of cancer resulting from conventional
chemotherapy is probably a lot higher," Dr Thrasher said.

    A second 10-month-old child with SCID also underwent gene therapy at Great
Ormond Street four months ago. The patient is doing even better than Rhys at a
comparable stage.

    Dr Thrasher said Great Ormond Street has applied to the Gene Therapy
Advisory Committee for permission to conduct further trials on other conditions

    He added: "In principle, it means we can extend this type of therapy to
other blood diseases and that's going to be hugely important for many of our
patients who don't have bone marrow donors."

    DISORDERS AND DISEASES THAT COULD BE TACKLED

    Mucopolysaccharide diseases: these affect one in every 25,000 babies and are
are caused by genetic defects resulting in missing enzymes. Waste products build
up inside cells, causing progressive physical and sometimes mental
deterioration. Children with the disease usually die young and at present there
is no cure.

    Chronic granulomatous disorder: simple inherited defects involving just one
gene cause this life-threatening blood disorder. Children are vulnerable to
pneumonia, bone infections and abscesses on vital organs. Gene therapy trials
are to begin soon at Great Ormond Street.

    Cystic Fibrosis: the most common genetic disorder of north Europeans. A
single gene defect causes a build- up of sticky mucous in the airways of the
lungs. Children have to undergo hours of physiotherapy. Scientists have already
begun trials to replace the defective gene using a genetically modified cold
virus, but this has proved difficult.

    Haemophilia: one of the most studied genetic diseases, it famously affected
the royal families of Europe. It is caused by the lack of blood-clotting factors
which control bleeding and bruising. Gene therapy trials in the US have begun
with the first few patients producing healthy amounts of the missing clotting
factors. The Royal Free Hospital in London has considered a similar trial.

    Primary immunodeficiencies: these affect the immune system. Over 80 diseases
have been identified and the most complex are the severe combined
immunodeficiencies (SCIDs), a variety of which afflicts Rhys Evans.

LOAD-DATE: April 09, 2002


                             736 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2002 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            March 2, 2002, Saturday

SECTION: Your Money: ; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 858 words

HEADLINE: THE WEEK IN REVIEW: AMERSHAM CURES ITS ILLS

BYLINE: Stephen Foley

BODY:


    George Wimpey

    The acquisition of Alfred McAlpine Homes and the integration of McLean Homes
has created a pounds 1bn giant, enabled Wimpey to slim down its head office
costs and pour its energies into improving profit margins. The twin threats of
rising unemployment and higher interest rates will calm the housing market this
year, so a wholesale collapse in prices is not the likeliest scenario. Hold.

    Fyffes

    The recovery in the banana price, thanks to the European Union's policing of
a new trade accord with the US, has enabled Fyffes has put the slip- ups of 2000
well behind it. The fruit and veg distributor has made a great go of cost
-cutting and, two months into the current year, is able to point to encouraging
trading. Buy.

    Oxford BioMedica

    The gene therapy firm has made interesting progress in its attempt to
develop a treatment for breast cancer, but Oxford BioMedica remains the highest
of high -risk investments. It has missed out on potentially lucrative
collaboration agreements, and its house broker widened its forecast losses for
2002 by nigh on 50 per cent. For hardened gamblers only.

    Michael Page

    Michael Page International, the City recruitment firm, saw its business
start to slow last summer and things have been getting worse since. Recruitment
companies have tried to claim that their business holds up even in a downturn
because their clients look for temporary workers instead of permanent ones. But
that, as Michael Page's chief executive, Terry Benson, concedes, is arrant
nonsense. With no economic turnaround in prospect, that is too expensive.

    Bunzl

    Bunzl is in the business of plastic bags, stick-on labels and clingfilm. It
supplies supermarkets with all those things they need but don't actually sell.
It also distributes packaging to caterers and wholesales cigarette filters and
sticky tape. It continues to grow despite the global economic slowdown and
deflation of raw materials prices and is worth holding

    Galliford Try

    The merger of Galliford and Try has created a construction group with
interests spanning southern England housebuilding, private finance initiative
school building and project management for utilities such as the water business
of United Utilities. Half-year results raised worries over margins in the
construction business, and investors should also expect a damping of the housing
market. Take profits.

    Aggreko

    Did someone turn out the lights at Aggreko? After a bright start to 2001,
when the power generators supplier struck gold in electricity-hungry California,
the year got darker. Temperatures refused to soar, reducing demand for its air
-conditioning systems, the recession-hit demand from companies, and 11 September
put people off partying, damaging Aggreko's event and entertainment business in
its strongest quarter. Avoid.

    Ultimate Leisure

    The party looks likely to continue at this late-night bars group. Newcastle-
based Ultimate Leisure has switched its focus from ordinary bars to larger clubs
with late-night licences. Ultimate doesn't operate under a single brand, giving
it scope to open several units in a small area, and it has cornered the market
in drinking haunts such as Newcastle's Bigg Market. Buy.

    Rentokil Initial

    Rentokil should have little difficulty delivering its promise of 8 to 15 per
cent annual earnings growth, with further share buy-backs and new acquisitions
in hygiene and security on the cards. But with its high margins, Rentokil finds
itself in the firing line in numerous local price wars. Sales growth will be
more modest just when the company needs something more exciting to spur further
progress. Investors should cash in their recent profits.

    MFI Furniture

    MFI Furniture was a busted flush three years ago, with high debts and a
brand image that was questionable at best. But the business has been transformed
since John Hancock arrived from WH Smith as chief executive. He has cut debts
with sale and leasebacks, stripped out under-performing products and added a
dash of style to what had become a moribund format. The shares are not cheap but
still have some upside.

    The above is a selection of recommendations from this week's daily
investment columns

    TECHNOLOGY COMPANIES live or die by the quality of their intellectual
property and need robust patents on their core products to fend off copycat
rivals. So there was rejoicing that Amersham has settled the four-year battle
against Applera, the US firm it claimed infringed its patents in dye chemistry
and instrumentation.

    These technologies are staples of Amersham's business developing dyes put
into the human body to improve the clarity of pictures from medical scanners and
help doctors diagnose disease.

    The other half of the group is Amersham Biosciences, which sells equipment
for sequencing genes and helping universities and companies research the reasons
people are prone to certain diseases. It can benefit as the medical industry
develops "personalised medicine" based on a patient's genetic predispositions.
Amersham shares should be a core holding in a portfolio of blue chips.

LOAD-DATE: April 09, 2002


                             739 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2002 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                          February 28, 2002, Thursday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1028 words

HEADLINE: SCIENTIFIC PIONEERS: BRITISH EXPERTS SET TO LEAD WORLD REVOLUTION IN
MEDICAL SCIENCE;
 EMBRYO RESEARCH WATCHDOG POISED TO GIVE TWO TEAMS THE GO -AHEAD FOR
GROUND-BREAKING STEM-CELL RESEARCH

BYLINE: Steve Connor Professor John Burn: Therapeutic potential of stem cells is
enormous North News; Dr Austin Smith, of the Centre for Genome Research, said
stem cells could be used to treat potentially fatal diseases Jeremy; Sutton
Hibbert

BODY:


    BRITAIN'S OFFICIAL watchdog on embryo research is expected today to give the
go -ahead for two teams of scientists to treat incurable diseases using using
stem cells derived from test-tube human embryos.

    They will become the first scientists in the world to receive a government's
endorsement for pursuing experiments that could lead to a revolution in medical
science, as well as producing the first cloned human embryos.

    The Human Fertilisation and Embryology Authority (HFEA) met yesterday to
consider the two research applications under a new law, passed last year, which
allows the use of embryonic stem cells for therapeutic purposes. The authority
will inform the scientists today of its decisions, which are expected to be in
favour.

    Both teams want licences to extract the stem cells from test-tube embryos
created by fertilising an egg with a sperm, but they might in the future want to
extend this to include cloned human embryos.

    A spokesman for the HFEA yesterday refused to name the research institutes
which have applied for the licences but The Independent has learnt that they are
the Universities of Edinburgh and Newcastle.

    Austin Smith, of Edinburgh's Centre for Genome Research, and Professor John
Burn, of Newcastle's medical genetics department, are keen advocates of
embryonic stem-cell research, which promises to revolutionise the treatment of
many of the most serious and incurable diseases.

    Dr Smith said that embryonic stem cells could be used to treat a variety of
potentially fatal illnesses, ranging from Parkinson's to chronic heart disease
and cancer. He has confirmed that a licence application has been made.

    Professor Burn said that Newcastle had also made a licence application
because the city's new Centre for Life was "perfectly placed" to carry out the
difficult techniques of extracting and growing stems cells from six-day-old
human embyros, which are too small to be seen with the naked eye.

    "Newcastle is an obvious place where such research is feasible. There are
only a handful of places in Britain with the potential for extracting stem cells
from blastocysts (embryos) and we're one of them," Professor Burn said.

    The HFEA met to discuss the two applications on the same day that the House
of Lords Select Committee on Stem Cell Research endorsed the Government's new
laws allowing the use of human embryos for therapeutic purposes while banning
attempts at cloning a human baby.

    Richard Harries, the Bishop of Oxford, who chaired the select committee,
said that although the use of stem cells from early human embryos raised
difficult moral and scientific issues, the potential benefits outweighed
drawbacks.

    The Right Rev Harries also dismissed suggestions that stem cells derived
from adults were a viable alternative to the embryonic stem cells - a view
fostered by anti-abortion groups opposed to the whole idea of embryo research.

    A spokeswoman for Comment on Reproductive Ethics, which opposes embryonic
stem -cell experiments, said the select committee's report was rigged. "There
has never been a proper presentation of the superiority of adult stem cells.
This bias could not have been more blatant than in the calling of verbal
evidence to the select committee," she claimed.

    The select committee also supported the Government's attempts to set up an
national stem cell bank, which are being co-ordinated by the Medical Research
Council. The bank will act as a central repository of any stem cells extracted
by scientists with HFEA licences.

    Sir George Radda, the MRC's chief executive, said that the frozen-cell bank
would be housed in an national research institute which must not be run by a
commercial company, an MRC institute nor a university with a vested interest in
stem-cell research. The bank would hold deposits of both adult stem cells and
embryonic stem cells. "Once stem cells have been generated, they can be
maintained and multiplied almost indefinitely," Sir George said.

    With the issuing of the first licences to use embryonic stem cells for
therapeutic treatment, Britain leads the world in the regulation of this
controversial area of research.

    In America, such research is banned in federally-funded laboratories, and
subject to rules on commercial confidentiality within private institutes. Many
other European countries have shied away from formally allowing the research to
proceed under the specific legislation now adopted in Britain.

    Mike Dexter, director of the Wellcome Trust, the biggest medical research
charity in the world, said that UK legislation was already setting a precedent
for the rest of the world to follow. "Scientists can now get on with finding
treatments for life-threatening diseases," said Dr Dexter, who has spent much of
his career investigating adult stem cells.

    Stem cells taken from early embryos are known to have the potential to
develop into any one of the many scores of specialised tissue cells of the body.
It is hoped that instead of replacing diseased organs or treating them with
drugs, it will be possible in future to repair them with stem cells. However,
for the treatment to be even more effective it will be necessary to generate
cloned embryos from a skin cell of a patient so that the stem cells do not
suffer tissue rejection.

    The law in Britain allows the creation of cloned embryos using the "cell
nuclear replacement" technique that was used to create Dolly the sheep but so
far the HFEA has not received any applications from scientists who propose to do
this. Professor Burn, however, said that his group may be close to seeking
formal permission for cell nuclear replacement, which is also known as
therapeutic cloning.

    "We would certainly consider it at a research level. It has to be done
because the therapeutic potential is enormous. It looks potentially far more
successful than gene therapy," Professor Burn said.

    Already experiments on rats have shown that embryonic stem cells can repair
damaged spinal cords, raising the possibility of allowing paralysis victims to
walk again.

    Leading article, Review, page 3; Natasha Walter, Review, page 5

LOAD-DATE: April 09, 2002


                             740 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2002 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                          February 28, 2002, Thursday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 190 words

HEADLINE: THE INVESTMENT COLUMN: OXFORD BIOMEDICA

BYLINE: Edited By Stephen Foley

BODY:


    OXFORD BIOMEDICA, the gene therapy firm set up by the husband and wife
professors Alan and Susan Kingsman, has made interesting progress in its attempt
to develop a treatment for breast cancer. Its MetXia vaccine looks like it can
cause the body to fight tumours beyond the immediate area into which it has been
injected.

    But let's not get too excited. Only four patients completed the treatment;
only one saw the heightened immune response. That's far from statistically
significant. It is certainly another promising little step, but Oxford BioMedica
remains the highest of high-risk investments.

    Annual results out yesterday were a little disappointing. Losses of pounds
8.3m were up from pounds 5.0m in 2000, but it was the lack of significant
turnover from its drug development unit which was most disappointing. It missed
out on a number of potentially lucrative collaborative agreements at the end of
last year because of the retrenchment seen in the wake of 11 September. The
house broker widened its forecast losses for 2002 by nigh on 50 per cent. The
shares, down 5p to 32.5p, are for hardened gamblers only.

LOAD-DATE: April 09, 2002


                             747 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2002 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            February 8, 2002, Friday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 231 words

HEADLINE: GENE THAT CAUSES GLAUCOMA IS FOUND

BYLINE: Steve Connor Science Editor

BODY:


    A LEADING cause of blindness that affects more than 10 million people
worldwide has been identified by scientists.

    An international team of researchers has found that a single gene is
responsible for blighting generations of families affected by glaucoma.

    Finding the gene will soon lead to an accurate test for the disease, which
strikes in adulthood, so that children can be diagnosed early and given
preventive treatment as soon as possible. The discovery could also lead to
better treatments using drugs aimed directly at the defect within the eye, and
it opens the way to replacing the diseased gene with a healthy copy through the
process of gene therapy.

    "Certainly, understanding the causes of glaucoma will help us to develop
more specific treatment," said Anne Child, a research geneticist at St George's
Hospital in London, who was part of the team that completed the study published
in the journal Science. "At present, it permits us to offer rapid, accurate DNA
screening in families carrying this gene. The present excellent treatment
available can then be offered to those found to be gene carriers, even before
vision is lost, preserving sight for longer."

    Glaucoma, which is usually diagnosed by a build-up of pressure inside the
eye, can cause irreversible damage to the optic nerve.

    Gene therapy's new lease of life, Science, Review, page 8

LOAD-DATE: April 09, 2002


                             748 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2002 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            February 8, 2002, Friday

SECTION: Friday Review: FEATURES; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 1482 words

HEADLINE: SCIENCE: GENE THERAPY'S NEW LEASE OF LIFE;
 SCIENTISTS SAID IT WOULD CURE ALL ILLS - BUT THEY COULDN'T MAKE IT WORK. NOW,
FINALLY, GENE THERAPY IS NOTCHING UP SOME NOTABLE SUCCESSES, SAYS STEVE CONNOR

BYLINE: Steve Connor A gene-therapy operation on Carly Todd, the first such
patient in; Britain, proved disappointing Bobby Hotchkiss; W French Anderson,
who pioneered the technique in the US

BODY:


    When a little girl called Ashanthi DeSilva became in September 1990 the
first person in the world to be treated with the revolutionary technique of gene
therapy, the optimism of everyone involved was palpable. Gene therapy was going
to cure the previously incurable, it would rid humanity of many of the most
distressing diseases and banish the belief that we are always going to be the
hapless victims of our wayward DNA.

    Gene therapy, where "healthy" copies of a gene or strand of DNA are inserted
into the body, was going to correct inherited defects and metabolic disorders,
as well as provide new avenues for treating lethal diseases such as cancer. With
the decoding of the human genome, gene therapy was going to open the doors to
the treatment of any disorder involving errors buried deep within the
chromosomes. All it would take is to splice a corrected gene into our defective
DNA.

    It was, of course, almost total hype. Since 1990, there have been about 500
clinical trials worldwide involving gene therapy, and the vast majority have so
far proved less than successful. Ashanthi is still doing well today but doctors
believe that this is probably more to do with the drugs she takes than the gene
therapy. Britain's first gene-therapy operation, on toddler Carly Todd in 1993,
when she was 17 months old, also proved disappointing, although Carly is now
doing well after conventional treatment and a bone-marrow transplant.

    The reality is that it has been an uphill struggle to get gene therapy to
work. "There was initially a great burst of enthusiasm that lasted three, four
years where a couple of hundred trials got started all over the world," says
gene -therapy pioneer W French Anderson, who led the team at the US National
Institutes of Health that treated Ashanthi. "Then we realised that nothing was
really working at the clinical level."

    And that was before tragedy struck in September 1999, when a young American
called Jesse Gelsinger died after a gene-therapy injection into his liver. No
one is sure exactly why he died four days after the injection. It seems his
immune system launched a raging attack on the adenovirus "vector" that
scientists used to carry the corrected genes into his liver. After that, he
suffered an overwhelming cascade of organ failures, starting with jaundice and
progressing to a blood-clotting disorder, kidney failure, lung failure and
ultimately brain death.

    It was perhaps the lowest point in the history of gene therapy, and
questions were raised not just about whether it would ever work, but whether it
would ever be safe.

    Over the past two years, however, gene therapy has begun to experience a
renaissance. In April 2000, a team of French scientists published information
showing unequivocally for the first time that gene therapy could correct Severe
Combined Immune Deficiency (Scid) disease in young children. Four months after
that, American doctors said they had halted the growth of head and neck tumours
using a form of gene therapy. More recently, scientists have reported that they
have repaired the gene behind Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy, albeit only in an
experiment on laboratory mice.

    But perhaps the most exciting success recently has been in the treatment of
haemophilia, one of the first diseases shown to have a genetic basis. Everyone
involved in gene therapy is watching this particular clinical trial with intense
interest because haemophilia is seen as the standard on which the entire edifice
of gene therapy could stand or fall. "It's a fantastic model for other inherited
conditions," says Professor Christine Lee, head of the haemophilia centre at the
Royal Free Hospital in London, where the first UK trial could soon begin.

    Haemophilia, when the blood fails to clot, is caused by a gene defect that
prevents the production of clotting factors. It is a sex-linked disorder,
affecting about one in every 5,000 baby boys. Patients can suffer badly from
internal bleeding, especially around the joints. Haemophilia A, the most common
form of the disease, is when factor VIII is lacking and haemophilia B is caused
by a lack of factor IX.

    Katherine High, a haematologist at the Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,
and Mark Kay, a geneticist at Stanford University in California, have chosen to
conduct gene-therapy trials on haemophilia B patients because the factor IX gene
is slightly shorter than factor VIII and is therefore easier to insert into the
viral vector.

    The aim is to engineer a patient's genes enough for the patient to produce
just 1 per cent of normal levels of factor IX. This sounds minuscule, but just
this tiny amount of the missing factor is enough to restore the condition of the
patients to a state that is far easier to control. "At 1 per cent clotting
factor, (the patient's condition) changes from severe disease to moderate, which
really increases quality of life of the individual," explains Kay. At 1 per
cent, most of the joint damage and bleeding complications of the disease are
prevented, and if gene therapy cannot deliver this extremely moderate increase
in gene activity, what hope is there for other genetic diseases?

    Initial results of the trial, where the first three patients had injections
into thigh muscles, proved successful. Within two to three months the gene was
making the factor IX protein, and two of the patients started producing at
levels that enabled them to take fewer injections of the clotting factor itself.
Most importantly, none showed any ill effects.

    One of the important aspects of the trial was the type of vector used to
carry the gene into the patient's cells. Instead of using the adenovirus (a
common cold virus) that was implicated in Gelsinger's death, the scientists used
adeno -associated virus (AAV). Unlike adenovirus, AAV does not appear to
stimulate the human immune system, which is why it is considered safer.

    As more patients were recruited to take part in the trial, Kay and High
planned the next phase of the experiment - direct injection of the AAV and the
factor IX gene into the patient's liver. This is expected to result in a
significant boost in factor IX levels. However, this part of the trial came to
an abrupt halt last October when the researchers detected AAV in the semen of
some of the patients.

    This raised fears that genetic alterations might also be taking place inside
the sperm cells, which is forbidden in the US (and the UK) because of concerns
that it could lead to "germline" gene therapy, when the DNA of subsequent
generations is altered artificially. However, further research showed that the
viral genes had not penetrated the sperm cells and that the virus is eventually
cleared from the semen.

    The US Food and Drug Administration has now allowed the trial to continue,
and last week Professor High prepared to inject the altered genes into the
second patient's liver. "Discovering the AAV vector in the semen appears to be a
shedding phenomenon and after a while it should wash out," says Professor High.

    This is good news for scientists in the UK, who are watching the experiment
closely with a view to setting up a similar trial in Britain. Professor Lee at
the Royal Free says she has already made tentative approaches to the UK's
regulatory agency, the Gene Therapy Advisory Committee (GTAC). "I do expect
trials to come here, but quite when that's going to happen is not entirely
clear," Professor Lee says. "My guess is that certainly in the next five years
we'll be participating in trials, but I feel a little conservative about the
time it will take for it to become mainstream treatment."

    There are still many problems to overcome, especially the residing fears
over germline gene therapy. Professor Norman Nevin, the chairman of GTAC, said
that one of the guiding principles on which the committee makes decisions is
that there is little or no risk of altering the genes of sperm or eggs. "At the
present state of the art I am certain that the GTAC would not consider a project
that would carry a high risk of germline transmission," Professor Nevin says.

    The American regulatory agency is insisting that Professor High's trial
makes regular and detailed analyses to ensure that germline alterations do not
occur unwittingly. However, it is not an approach that everyone agrees with.
Eric Jungst, a bioethicist from Case Western Reserve University in Cleveland,
Ohio, argues that such an accidental change could be a boon for those in favour
of germline gene therapy.

    As he says: "If by chance one of these accidents did effect a germ-line
cure, it would be an awfully powerful selling point for those who say we should
be taking that position from the beginning." If gene therapy is shown to work on
patients today, perhaps we can do something similar to cure the patients of
tomorrow who have yet to be born.

LOAD-DATE: April 09, 2002


                             749 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2002 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            February 4, 2002, Monday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 507 words

HEADLINE: GENE CURE TRIALS FOR BLOOD-CLOT DISORDER

BYLINE: Steve Connor Science Editor

BODY:


    DOCTORS ARE preparing to run the first British clinical trial of a radical
treatment for haemophilia, the blood- clotting disorder inherited by one in
every 5,000 babies.

    The trial will involve injecting volunteers with a genetically engineered
version of the common cold virus containing a human blood-clotting gene. If the
experiment works, patients will probably need only one injection every year
rather than the three injections of blood-clotting agents they now receive each
week to prevent uncontrolled bleeding.

    Haemophilia, one of the first diseases to be shown to have a genetic cause,
is seen as an important test of whether gene therapy can cure inherited
diseases. Gene therapy has had only limited success, such as in treating rare
disorders of the immune system.

    Scientists from the Royal Free Hospital in London have had talks with the
Government's gene therapy advisory committee, which regulates genetic
experiments on patients. The trial could begin soon after they receive
regulatory approval

    The experiment will be based on a trial in the United States in which eight
men with haemophilia are being injected with a virus that carries the corrected
gene into the cells of the body, where it begins orchestrating the production of
a protein factor that triggers the formation of blood clots.

    Katherine High, a haematologist at the Children's Hospital of Philadelphia
who is running the trial, had to suspend it last year after she detected viral
genes in the semen of one of the volunteers. This raised fears that the gene
therapy might result in the alteration of genes within sperm, risking the
passing on of a genetic alteration of children. This would constitute "germline
gene therapy", which is banned in both Britain and the United States.

    Further research showed that the viral genes had not penetrated the sperm
cells and that the virus was eventually cleared from the semen. The American
Food and Drug Administration has therefore allowed the trial to continue,
raising the prospect of a similar experiment in Britain.

    Christine Lee, a professor of haemophilia and the director of the
haemophilia centre at the Royal Free, said trials were expected, but when they
would start was not clear. The formal proposal to the government committee was
not finished, she said. "My guess is that certainly in the next five years we'll
be participating in trials but I feel a little conservative about the time it
will take for it to become mainstream treatment," Professor Lee said. "If
someone has mild haemophilia, I don't think you're going to use gene therapy
because the only time they're going to need treatment is when they have an
operation."

    Professor Lee said there were ethical difficulties with introducing a new
treatment when existing therapies worked so well. People had to be told they
were being used in an experiment rather than treated. Gene therapy, however,
would have many advantages if it worked, she said. "It's a fantastic model for
other inherited conditions."

LOAD-DATE: April 09, 2002


                             751 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2002 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                           January 29, 2002, Tuesday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 310 words

HEADLINE: SCIENTISTS USE GENE THERAPY TO TREAT INFERTILITY

BYLINE: Steve Connor Science Editor

BODY:


    MALE STERILITY caused by missing sperm has been treated successfully through
gene therapy in which DNA is injected into tissues to replace defective genes.

    A study using male mice carrying a genetic defect that blocks sperm
production has shown for the first time that gene therapy on testicular tissue
can restore fertility.

    Scientists in Japan, led by Takashi Shinohara of Kyoto University, have
demonstrated that inserting healthy copies of the gene into the sterile males
can unblock sperm production. They did the gene therapy on the Sertoli cells of
the testes, which provide nutrients and nourishment to the "germ" cells that
produce sperm.

    Some of the infertile mice used in the experiment began to produce immature
sperm cells and in one case the sperm was mature enough to inject into
unfertilised eggs to produce healthy offspring.

    The scientists said, in a scientific paper published yesterday in the
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, that gene therapy could be used
to treat infertile men with similar inherited defects. "Our successful
production of offspring from an infertile male mouse suggests a promising
possibility for the gene therapy approach in the treatment of male infertility,"
the scientists said.

    About one in five couples experience difficulty in having a baby and about
20 per cent of these cases are caused solely by male infertility.

    Professor Norman Nevin, chairman of the Government's Gene Therapy Advisory
Committee, said the study would have to be replicated before human clinical
trials in Britain would be permitted.

    t The Christie Hospital in Manchester says that the transplant of testicular
tissue may have helped a man who had cancer treatment to father a child. The man
had the tissue stored in ice before he received chemotherapy, which usually
results in sterility.

LOAD-DATE: January 29, 2002


                             766 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2001 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                          November 22, 2001, Thursday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 484 words

HEADLINE: CANCER CELLS TRICKED INTO SUICIDE BY GENE THERAPY

BYLINE: Steve Connor Science Editor Only the tumour cells are attacked in new
technique

BODY:


    SCIENTISTS HAVE performed a "con trick" on cancer by persuading tumour cells
to self- destruct after treatment with a new form of gene therapy.

    The researchers said that the technique was a potential breakthrough in
cancer treatment, which could be applied to many types of tumour that were
currently difficult or impossible to treat.

    Although the scientists have so far only done the research in the test tube,
they believe that early results show that it could become a powerful new tool
for treating cancer within five to 10 years.

    Gene therapy, in which genes are manipulated to treat a medical condition,
is still in its infancy but the Glasgow University team believes that the first
clinical trials on cancer patients using the new technique could begin within
two years.

    "I feel very strongly that our research represents a potential breakthrough,
with implications for the treatment of a variety of common cancers," said Dr
Nicol Keith, who led the team from the Cancer Research Campaign's Beatson
Laboratories in Glasgow.

    "People have discussed similar kinds of gene therapy system before, but
we've now made significant progress by moving from talking about the theory to
actually killing cancer cells in a very efficient manner," Dr Keith said.

    The research, published today in the journal Oncogene, involves introducing
a gene into cancer cells that has the effect of switching on another gene that
kills the cell. Ordinary cells are left untouched because the introduced gene
contains a genetic switch that is only usually turned on in cancer cells.

    "With a bit of genetic trickery, we've managed to fool cancer cells to their
doom without harming normal cells. I'm optimistic that we could soon have
targeted treatments that spare cancer patients the side-effects that many suffer
today," Dr Keith said.

    Cancer cells are known to switch on a gene called telomerase, which causes
the cells to replicate uncontrollably. By attaching the switch for telomerase to
a cancer toxin gene called nitroreductase, the scientists can selectively kill
tumour cells without harming healthy tissue.

    "We're using a sleight of hand to convince cancer cells that they're
switching on the telomerase gene which they need for their survival when they're
actually switching on a gene that will ultimately kill them," Dr Keith said.

    Nitroreductase does not destroy tumours directly but converts a drug, called
CB1954, which is normally harmless, into a toxin that rapidly kills cancer
cells. Healthy cells will not produce nitroreductase and will not be harmed
unless they are directly adjacent to a cancer cells that is producing the toxin.

    Gordon McVie, director general of the Cancer Research Campaign, said: "I'm
looking forward to seeing it developed for patients as soon as possible. If it
works in one kind of cancer, it should be effective in many others."

LOAD-DATE: November 22, 2001


                             771 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2001 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                           October 13, 2001, Saturday

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 155 words

HEADLINE: BOOKS: JAMES WATSON

BYLINE: Stuart Price

BODY:


    The Nobel laureate James Watson's The Double Helix, his chronicling of the
discovery of the structure of DNA in the early 1950s, is one of a handful of
seminal popular-science books. The central irony of the story is that, while the
double-helical structure of DNA is a model of perfection and beauty, the
discovery was marked by childish squabbling and competition. An untidy but
engrossing affair. Watson (left) himself has become an increasingly
controversial scientist, with some considering him to be trading on his eminence
to propound unpalatable and half-baked theories, particularly about gene
therapy. In this session, which is open to the public, he will talk about his
most recent book, A Passion for DNA, a collection of 25 provocative essays and
writings on, among other subjects, genetic cloning, cures for cancer, and GM
foods.

    Oxford Union, St Michael's St, Oxford (01865 203901) today, 3pm, free

LOAD-DATE: October 13, 2001


                             779 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2001 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                           September 10, 2001, Monday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1338 words

HEADLINE: HOW ACCUSATIONS OF RACISM ENDED THE PLAN TO MAP THE GENETIC DIVERSITY
OF MANKIND

BYLINE: Steve Connor Science Editor Professor Kenneth Kidd: 'It's
extraordinarily sad'

BODY:


    IT WAS an attempt to preserve the marvellous genetic diversity of the human
species. It would shed light on our evolutionary past and open new avenues to
treat many of today's most intractable diseases.

    That was the dream. The reality is that 10 years after its inception, the
Human Genome Diversity Project has all but disintegrated, having fallen victim
to accusations of racism and commercial exploitation.

    It is a far cry from the idealistic intentions of the scientists who
proposed the project. They envisaged the establishment of a genetic museum to
store the DNA codes of the many hundreds of indigenous peoples and so preserve a
wealth of information on the diversity of the human race.

    Such diversity is fast disappearing as once-isolated tribes migrate,
intermarry or simply die off. It is under threat from war, urbanisation and
creeping globalisation.

    But, to the dismay of the project's mentors, many of the indigenous people
themselves did not want to be part of their dream. "You want to preserve our
genes," was the typical refrain, "but you don't want to preserve us."

    The better-known Human Genome Project was an attempt to decipher the DNA
code of the typical human being. The Human Genome Diversity Project was aimed at
understanding the nature of the subtle genetic differences between people.

    Where the diversity scientists went wrong was in underestimating the
sensitivities attached to studying these genetic differences.

    Kenneth Kidd, a veteran geneticist at Yale University and one of the
founders of the diversity project, said he did not anticipate the way the
project would be received. "The blatant lies that went on," Professor Kidd said.
"I was insulted to my face. The project was called unethical when it was an
attempt to put the research on an ethical basis. To study differences is not
racist. Racists don't need to study differences, they are doing just fine as
they are."

    Luigi Luca Cavalli-Sforza, professor of genetics at Stanford University in
California, who put forward the idea to gather DNA from the world's indigenous
peoples, believes the project became a pawn of political activists.

    "We were misinterpreted or maligned by a few organizations with many false
accusations, ranging from inexisting dangers to inexisting financial interests
and collusions with biotechnology industries," Professor Cavalli- Sforza said.
It is difficult to avoid the doubt that they used us for their totally unrelated
political aims. People interested in fighting racism can only recognise our
strong contribution to this fight."

    Although the genetic differences between people are relatively small
compared to most other species, they can still provide valuable insights into
human evolution by showing how aboriginal groups diverged from a common
ancestor.

    The differences could also help medical researchers to discover genetic
predispositions to disease and what makes some some ethnic groups apparently
more resistant - or susceptible - to particular illnesses.

    It was this aspect - with its potential for commercial exploitation and gene
patenting - that raised some of the greatest suspicions. Opponents argued that
the diversity project would be used by Western drug companies to develop and
patent lucrative new treatments based on the DNA of the poor and dispossessed.

    In 1995, some aboriginal groups, mainly from North and South America, voiced
their opposition to a project which, they said, "intends to collect and make
available our genetic materials which may be used for commercial, scientific and
military purposes ... We demand the Human Genome Diversity Project and any other
such scientific project cease any attempts to seduce or coerce participation in
their projects through promises of benefits and financial gain in order to
obtain consent and participation of indigenous peoples".

    Debra Harry, a member of the Northern Paiute Nation in America and one of
the most articulate opponents of the project, said the study would be a licence
for "bioprospectors" to stake legal claims on the natural genetic resources of
aboriginal groups.

    "Once genetic materials are stored in gene banks, they will be available in
perpetuity, with minimal control, to anyone requesting access," she said.

    "Medical applications are in fact likely to result from the eventual
research, manipulation and commercialisation of the genetic materials. But they
will most likely come in the form of pharmaceuticals or expensive genetic
therapy techniques. Possible benefits will go only to those who can afford the
high costs of such treatments."

    Then, in November 1997, 30 groups representing indigenous peoples in North,
South and Central America produced the Ukupseni Declaration, which marginalised
the project even further. "This research and other research projects on
indigenous genomes go against human life and in particular violate the genetic
integrity on indigenous peoples," the declaration said.

    Stung by the mounting criticism, the project's leaders compiled a lengthy
justification based on the study's potential benefits. But by now any hope of
raising the funding had all but disappeared. The original target was for $ 25m,
but in 1996 a Government committee of 17 scientists had recommended much more
limited support and stipulated it should only be for American projects.

    Virginia Dominguez, the Professor of Anthropology at the University of Iowa
and a member of the committee, made her views plain. "Nowhere in the report does
our committee endorse the humane human genetic diversity project," she said
dismissively.

    Without a groundswell of support, however, the funding dried up and the
project was left to wither. To this day, Professor Kidd remains convinced of its
merits. Based on the distinct languages in the world - excluding dialects -
there are something like 7,000 indigenous groups, he said. The aim was to
collect tissue samples from as many of these groups as possible using
standardised techniques so that any scientist anywhere in the world could access
the DNA databank.

    "In may cases cultures are dying out, not because people are dying but
because their youngsters are moving to the cities," Professor Kidd said.

    "There is this global urbanisation and that's not something that any
scientist can stop. By trying to get samples of these small indigenous groups
before they amalgamate we are preserving a window into the past."

    Professor Cavalli-Sforza said that knowing and preserving human genetic
diversity is essential if the full benefits of the Human Genome Project are to
be realised. "Without a detailed study of individual and group variation it will
remain largely useless," he said.

    The diversity project may go ahead in a more limited form. There is a plan
to build a smaller databank based on DNA samples from about 200 different ethnic
groups that have been collected over a number of years on a piecemeal basis.

    "(But) one of the hopes of the diversity project was to develop a
standardised protocol to that we are able to share data," Professor Kidd said.

    "We've been prevented from doing that on scale we envisaged. It's
extraordinarily sad."

    DISAPPEARING PEOPLES: WHY TRIBES ARE IN DANGER THE WORLD OVER

    ABORIGINES: AUSTRALIA

    Disease, alcoholism and shift to urban lifestyle

    BUSHMEN: SOUTH AFRICA

    Hunting lifestyle threatened; poverty and disease

    HILL PEOPLE: PAPUA NEW GUINEA

    Rainforest destruction, migration

    BASQUES: NORTHERN SPAIN

    Threat from migration and intermarriage

    NATIVE AMERICANS: UNITED STATES Urbanisation, alcoholism, social breakdown

    ANDAMAN ISLANDERS: INDIAN OCEAN Infertility and migrations

    YANOMAMI: AMAZON RAINFOREST

    Dying out from disease and infertility

    LAPPS: SCANDINAVIA

    Culture dying out, intermarriage and discrimination

    MARSH ARABS: SOUTHERN IRAQ

    Wars and concerted efforts to destroy their way of life

    PYGMIES: CENTRAL AFRICA

    Wars, migration and destruction of habitat

LOAD-DATE: September 10, 2001


                             780 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2001 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                          September 6, 2001, Thursday

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 1028 words

HEADLINE: EDUCATION: THE MASTER OF RED TAPE;
 AFTER SEVEN YEARS IN CHARGE OF THE NHS, SIR ALAN LANGLANDS LEFT TO RUN THE
UNIVERSITY OF DUNDEE. THE BUDGET'S SMALLER, BUT THE CHALLENGES ARE JUST AS BIG.
BY FRED BRIDGLAND

BYLINE: Fred Bridgland Sir Alan Langlands, pictured, outside the Wellcome Trust
Biocentre, knows he has to tap-dance for his dinner

BODY:


    There was some surprise when Sir Alan Langlands, a Glaswegian and the highly
regarded chief executive of the National Health Service in England, retreated
460 miles northwards to run the University of Dundee.

    It is part of Whitehall legend that he left partly because of politicisation
of NHS management, but Sir Alan, 49, who was appointed principal and vice
-chancellor at Dundee nine months ago, makes no comment on such folklore.

    He does, however, drop strong hints at the frustrations that may have built
up after seven years running the NHS. "The level of government department
interference in the higher education sector is much less than it currently is in
the NHS.

    "When I got fed up with the bureaucracy of the Department of Health and all
the machinations of Whitehall, it was always a great fascination for me to go
off to see and hear what was going on at the clinical level, where the people
were tremendous."

    There are also frustrations dealing with a pounds 120m annual budget in
academia instead of the NHS's pounds 32bn plus. Sir Alan sees tension between
two objectives trumpeted by England's higher education minister Margaret Hodge
and endorsed by her Scottish counterpart, Wendy Alexander, to increase student
numbers and raise teaching standards. The expansion in student numbers coupled
with a 10 per cent reduction in the real value of core grants from the Scottish
Higher Education Funding Council has forced university staff to become more
efficient. "It's a pretty tough assignment to strive for better quality with
less money and more students," he says.

    Typically, Sir Alan shows little emotion. However, after pointing out that
Labour has been very precise in its financial projections for the NHS and school
education, he says something which passes for passion: "They've been very quiet
on higher education, and while this university has got a little boost this year
of 6.2 per cent in real terms (against the Scottish universities' average of 5.3
per cent), it's not sustained.

    "Years two and three are essentially flat funding at the level of inflation.
I feel pretty strongly about it because that sort of cycle of funding doesn't
enable you to make a difference. You need sustained levels of growth to build up
capacity and capability, and to have the flexibility to change and move the
institution into new areas."

    Universities are too far down the public service funding queue, he believes.
Unless the economy becomes incredibly healthy, the Government will have to
confront the question of higher taxes in this parliament. "Public investment is
still very important," he says. "If there's a failure to invest in the basic
science and research infrastructure, we'll pay a terribly heavy penalty. Ten
years down the road we'll be even less competitive internationally."

    To supplement core public funding and maintain standards, Dundee, like most
British universities, has to tap-dance for its dinner. Sir Alan knew he was
coming to a university whose multi-million pound Wellcome Trust Biocentre,
housing 357 scientists and support staff, is the leading biochemical research
institute in Europe. He knew he was coming to a university which is home to Sir
David Lane, discoverer of the p-53 "guardian angel" gene active in suppressing
60 per cent of all cancers, and Sir Alfred Cuschieri, whose advanced keyhole
surgery techniques are vital to Lane's next task, gene therapy, which requires
sophisticated methods for getting manufactured p-53 protein to damaged strands
of DNA.

    The genius of Sir Philip Cohen, the director of the Wellcome Trust
Biocentre, Lane, Cuschieri and others has attracted many millions of pounds in
research grants and spawned several spin-out commercial companies. These
successes are vital to the economy of Dundee, where the relations between town
and gown are particularly close. The university recently launched a Centre for
Enterprise Management to accelerate the conversion of academic ideas into
economic enterprises. Currently, the university holds 80 patents, some of which
Sir Alan is convinced will deliver jackpots. Six of the world's top eight
pharmaceutical companies have research and development contracts with the
university, and more than 2,100 people, 3 per cent of the city's workforce, are
employed in the biotechnology sector - a far cry from the days when Dundee was
all jam and jute.

    Sir Alan inherited an access programme that has been going since 1993. As
many as 10 per cent of the entrants each year to Dundee come from disadvantaged
backgrounds and lack the required entrance qualifications. Remarkably, a higher
proportion of firsts and upper seconds comes via this route than from any other
student category.

    As a master of NHS red tape, Sir Alan recognises that his staff feel
overburdened by the Research Assessment Exercise (RAE), under which universities
are judged by the quality of their research. Indeed, Sir David Lane, widely
tipped for a Nobel Prize if his 20 years of work on p-53 result in a cancer
cure, is particularly scathing about the "academic papers not patents" culture
which he says drives the assessment system.

    However, Sir Alan urges his staff to keep teaching quality assessments and
the RAE in perspective - indeed, "perspective" is his favourite word. "Both have
served a purpose," he says. "They might have been implemented in a pretty
unsophisticated way and they need to be improved, but, undoubtedly, they've
raised standards."

    He does not appear to miss his powerful NHS role. Running Dundee is
fascinating, he says, and he is full of schemes for improvement. He and the dean
of medicine are looking for sponsors to give every first-year medical student a
laptop computer. "The evidence is that with a laptop they'd learn as much in
their first term as they learn in their first year," he says.

    At the university's much acclaimed Duncan of Jordanstone College of Art and
Design, he's hoping to encourage lecturers to run classes in creative thinking
for senior staff. "That could be fun!" he exclaims. "And I would have to include
myself in that, I guess."

    education@independent.co.uk

LOAD-DATE: September 6, 2001


                             789 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2001 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            August 2, 2001, Thursday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 123 words

HEADLINE: THE INVESTMENT COLUMN: OXFORD BIOMEDICA

BODY:


    OXFORD BIOMEDICA, the gene therapy firm set up by the husband and wife
professors Alan and Susan Kingsman, has been a disappointing investment for
shareholders who took part in its most recent pounds 35.5m fundraising at 55p-a
-share in April.

    The business continues to make progress in its work on the genes linked to
disease. An update with interims yesterday promised news on partnership
agreements for its gene discovery unit later in the year, while two technologies
to help in the treatment of cancer are currently in clinical trials.

    The shares climbed 3.5p to 36.5p but the stock is never going to be suitable
for widows and orphans and is probably too risky as long as biotechnology shares
remain out of fashion.

LOAD-DATE: August 2, 2001


                             797 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2001 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            June 27, 2001, Wednesday

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 74 words

HEADLINE: RADIO: PICK OF THE DAY

BYLINE: Fiona Sturges

BODY:


    SCIENCE IS a subject that brooks no argument. Or is it? It's easy to bow
down to the superior knowledge of scientists, but what happens when a
practitioner turns out to be a fraud? In Science Friction (9.00pm R4), Gerry
Northam looks into the case of Friedhelm Herrmann (right). A dashing pioneer in
gene therapy, he was the erstwhile darling of German science - until a group of
colleagues became wise to his dubious working methods.

LOAD-DATE: June 27, 2001


                             810 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2001 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                             May 5, 2001, Saturday

SECTION: TITLE PAGE; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 526 words

HEADLINE: WORLD'S FIRST 'GM BABIES' BORN BY METHOD BANNED IN THE UK

BYLINE: Steve Connor Science Editor

BODY:


    THE FIRST "genetically modified" humans have been created using an ethically
questionable technique of in-vitro fertilisation.

    Scientists in the United States have announced that two 12-month-old infants
are carrying the genes of more than one "mother" and that the genetic alteration
will, in theory, be passed on to their own children.

    The IVF technique used is banned in Britain and was criticised yesterday by
Lord Winston, one of Britain's leading fertility specialists, who is based at
the Hammersmith Hospital in London.

    Lord Winston said: "Regarding the treatment of the infertile, there is no
evidence that this technique is worth doing. I am very surprised that it was
even carried out at this stage."

    Lord Winston added that, although the number of additional genes involved
was tiny, it was in principle the wrong thing to do.

    A team led by Jacques Cohen, of the Institute for Reproductive Medicine and
Science, of West Orange, New Jersey, announced in the journal Human Reproduction
that tests on the children show they are the result of two human eggs used in
the IVF process.

    Up to 30 children worldwide are thought to have been born by the same
technique, whereby extra material from outside an egg's nucleus - called the
cytoplasm - is added to the egg of a woman suffering from a rare form of
infertility.

    The cytoplasm also includes structures called mitochondria, which have their
own set of genes. These are inherited only from mothers because male
mitochondria in the sperm are not injected into the fertilised egg.

    Professor Cohen's group analysed the blood of the 12-month-old infants born
by the technique and found that they possess mitochondrial DNA from two women -
their mother and the woman whose donated egg was the source of the extra
cytoplasm.

    The study points out that the additional mitochondrial genes will be passed
on to the children of females born by the technique, which is technically a form
of "germline" gene therapy, when DNA of the sperm and eggs are altered in a way
that will be inherited by subsequent generations.

    "This report is the first case of human germline genetic modification
resulting in normal, healthy children," Professor Cohen's team write in Human
Reproduction.

    Britain's Human Fertilisation and Embryology Authority has not licensed
researchers to use the IVF technique on the basis that it does not have a proven
safety record and could let in germline genetic modification by the back door.

    Two American bioethicists, Erik Parens of the Hastings Center in New York
and Eric Juengst of the Western Reserve Hospital in Cleveland, Ohio, have also
voiced their concerns in an editorial in the journal Science.

    "This news should gladden all who welcome new children into the world. And
it should trouble those committed to transparent public conversation about the
prospect of using 'reprogenetic' technologies to shape future children," the
bioethicists said.

    "We hope that before any other inadvertent steps are taken toward making
inheritable genetic modifications, those interventions will receive the public
discussion they deserve."

LOAD-DATE: May 5, 2001


                             813 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2001 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            April 26, 2001, Thursday

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 1299 words

HEADLINE: HEALTH: HOW TO SAVE YOUR OWN LIFE;
 IF YOU STORE SOME BLOOD FROM YOUR BABY'S UMBILICAL CORD NOW, IT COULD ONE DAY
TURN OUT TO BE A REAL LIFESAVER. SO WHY IS MOST BLOOD STILL BEING THROWN AWAY,
ASKS ROGER DOBSON

BYLINE: Roger Dobson

BODY:


    M inutes after baby Amber was born, one last job remained to be done before
the umbilical cord was finally cut. A needle was put into the cord and blood
drawn out into a special storage container. That was then put into protective
packaging, handed to an international courier, and flown to Tucson, Arizona,
where it was frozen and where it will remain in cold storage at minus 180C or so
until it is needed or no longer wanted.

    Amber Sundberg-Cohon is one of a growing number of children in Britain who
are having their cord blood stored as an insurance policy against future
illnesses. If the baby develops any one of more than 30 diseases later in life,
the cord blood could be unfrozen and used by doctors to treat the condition.

    The idea of new-born babies going through life with their own deep-frozen
biological repair kit, is rapidly gaining in popularity in the wake of a number
of operations where children with life-threatening diseases have been
successfully treated with the help of cord blood. Some doctors believe that
salvaging and storing cord blood will soon be standard practice at birth and
that it will be used to treat many more diseases and conditions than at present.

    "It is ironic that something that was considered to be garbage and thrown
into the trash is now being recognised as one of the more valuable pieces of the
body," says Professor David Harris, professor of immunology at Arizona
university, director of the world's biggest stem-cell bank, and scientific
director of the biggest cord -blood registry.

    Although storage of cord blood is increasingly popular with parents -
150,000 children in America have had blood stored - it's thought that around 99
per cent of cord blood is still wasted. In the UK, it is estimated that fewer
than 500 children have so far had their blood stored.

    The big attraction of cord blood is that it contains stem cells, the
immature cells that are the building blocks of blood and the immune system and
which are capable of becoming red blood cells which carry oxygen throughout the
body, white blood cells which fight infections, and platelets which are needed
for clotting.

    In life-threatening diseases such as leukaemia, sickle-cell anaemia and a
range of other disorders and immune-system conditions, bone-marrow transplants
can be carried out using material taken from suitable donors. The advantage of
using cord blood is that the child becomes its own donor with no problems of
matching or rejection. Research also suggests that when cord blood is used
instead of bone marrow, the patient usually has fewer, less severe side-effects.

    More than 1,000 transplants have now been carried out using cord blood,
either fresh from a newborn brother or sister, or from frozen storage. In
practice, the diseased bone marrow is first destroyed by drug therapy, and cord
blood is then transfused into the patient. The stems cells find their way to the
bone marrow and begins to grow new, healthy blood cells.

    So effective is cord blood, that doctors have successfully used umbilical-
cord blood transplants from unrelated donors to treat children with defective
and potentially fatal immune-system diseases. Banked, unrelated umbilical- cord
blood has been used to reconstitute the defective immune systems of two brothers
and two years after the transplant, doctors now say that the boys appear to be
cured and have normal immune systems.

    "Most children with these immune deficiencies die at an early age and nearly
all succumb in young adulthood," said Dr Richard Stiehm, professor of
paediatrics who led the operation at the Mattel Children's Hospital at the
University of California in Los Angeles. He says the results show that by using
healthy white blood cells grown from umbilical-cord stem cells instead of
bone-marrow cells, the immune system can return to its normal, healthy state.

    "We completely eliminated the defective immune system through chemotherapy
and replaced it with a healthy child's immune system. With umbilical-cord blood,
we transplant another baby's immune system into the sick child's body," he says.

    In another operation, carried out in Minnesota, a six-year-old girl, Molly
Nash, was given umbilical-cord blood taken from her brother Adam, who was
conceived in order to produce a match for Molly in an effort to help cure her of
the Fanconi's anaemia she was suffering from.

    It is predicted that the number of uses for stem cells from cord blood will
grow significantly over the next five to 10 years. Some believe that primitive
stem cells from cord blood could be used as the basis for many other types of
treatment by making the stem cells grow into almost anything.

    "Its value is already enormous, but it will increase tremendously with
advances in gene therapy, tissue engineering, and the use of stem cells to grow
various types of organs and cells types. We are already working on cord blood
and nerve tissue and corneas," says Professor Harris. "Mix stem cells with the
right growth factor and you can grow new nerve tissue or corneal tissue. You
will also be able to use it to correct genetic disorders. The potential is
huge."

    The success of the latest series of operations has led to increasing demand
for cord-blood banks, most of them in North America. London-based Jenette
Sundberg -Cohon and her husband, Craig, used California's Cord- Blood Registry
to store the blood of Amber who was born at the Portman Clinic in London in
February. The bank stores blood for 25,000 families, including 18 from the UK.

    "We did it first for our son Jonas when he was born two years ago. We think
of it as an insurance policy if anything happens. I think there are 23 diseases,
probably more now, which could be cured or ameliorated with stem-cells
transplants. The list is going to grow and who knows what it will be useful
for," says Jenette.

    "It is one of those things that if you can afford it, why wouldn't you do
it? It is the kind of spare part that you can't get down the line. Once your
baby is born, it goes out of production. Unless you get it at the time of birth,
it is lost forever, and there is no going back."

    Deep Frozen

    Repair Kit

    What is cord blood? It is blood taken from the veins of the umbilical cord
after birth. The cord itself does not contain much blood, but the extraction
also removes blood from the foetal side of the placenta.

    What is cord-blood banking? It is the process of collecting the cord blood
and freezing it for long-term cryogenic storage. No one knows how long it can be
stored, but some banks are working on 10 years. It is stored at temperatures of
about minus 180C.

    How is the blood taken? After the baby has been delivered, a needle is put
into the umbilical cord to extract the blood. The procedure is painless. The
average amount collected is about 80cc; it can vary from 40cc up to 200cc.
Collections as small as 30cc have been used successfully in transplants in
children, and 60cc in adults. Cord-blood banks provide customers with retrieval
kits.

    What are stem cells? They are immature master cells capable of growing into
the adult cells that are the major components of blood, bone marrow and the
immune system. White blood cells, red blood cells and platelets all come from
stem cells.

    What can they be used for? Leukaemia, non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, lupus and
Severe Combined Immunodeficiency or SCID are among the diseases that can be
treated. Transplanted stem cells from cord blood repopulate the bone marrow,
with healthy cells replacing diseased ones. Since the first cord transplant in
1988, there have been more than 1,000, two-thirds of them for malignant
conditions.

    How much does it cost? Cord-blood banking costs between pounds 500 and
pounds 1,700.

GRAPHIC: The number of children in the UK who have had cord blood stored is
approaching 500 Lennart Nilsson

LOAD-DATE: April 26, 2001


                             814 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2001 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            April 26, 2001, Thursday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 537 words

HEADLINE: EDUCATION: A TO Z OF A-LEVELS - BIOLOGY;
 OUR WEEKLY SERIES DESIGNED TO HELP YOU PICK THE RIGHT COURSE

BYLINE: Lucy Hodges

BODY:


    What is it? Supposedly the easiest of the three sciences. At AS- level you
start with cells and molecules, how a cell is built and what's in it -
carbohydrate, protein, fats. You follow on into animals and plants, looking at
reproduction (yes, the birds and the bees) and ecology, or at least you do if
you're studying with the Edexcel exam board. At A-level, you take a few of the
topics in greater depth, eg respiration and photosynthesis. You also study more
sophisticated genetics as well as evolutionary biodiversity.

    Why do it? Because you have always loved collecting insects, like the great
American entomologist E O Wilson, and/or because you think it will be useful
careerwise. You may fancy a job as a research worker in the new industries
associated with the genome and gene therapy, or working for an environmental
agency. Or you could teach.

    What skills do you need? The ability to soak up facts like a sponge, and
sort and synthesise a lot of information as well as explain things fully and
accurately.

    How much practical work is there? A fair amount. A requirement for AS- and A
-level is that you are assessed on a practical project, eg an experiment looking
at enzymes in washing powder. That carries 15 per cent of the marks. Plus you
undertake a series of named experiments linking with the subject material.

    Ratio of coursework to exams: 15: 85 (see above)

    Is it hard? Thought to be easier than chemistry or physics, partly because
it's less mathematical. But, according to Ed Lees, an examiner with Edexcel,
that's not the case because you have to describe complicated things pretty
technically. And there is some maths, using percentages and ratios, and making
sense of statistics.

    Is it enjoyable? Of course. You will be a walking expert on the human
genome, GM food and global warming, and you will be able to separate myth from
fact.

    Who takes it? More students than take physics or chemistry - and more girls
than boys.

    How cool is it? Pretty cool if you're into environmental protection and
healthy eating. It certainly beats physics in the cool stakes.

    Added value: You can go on some interesting, if maybe damp, field trips to
the British coast, inspecting sand dunes and rocks, or other trips to woodland
areas.

    What subjects go with it? Chemistry.

    What degrees does it lead to? Biological sciences, a big umbrella area, and
health sciences. Also medicine.

    Will it set you up for a brilliant career? Yes. You could, if you have the
talent, end up as a writer on science like Richard Dawkins, or as an academic
investigating the brain like Susan Greenfield, also at Oxford. Or you could
become a research biochemist studying DNA. The fallout from mapping the human
genome has thrown out numerous opportunities for research into, for example,
cures for Alzheimer's.

    What do students say? "I'm doing biology because I want to study medicine. I
find the subject interesting, but there is a lot to learn. For that reason I
find it harder than chemistry." Hannah Travers, 17, Ridgeway School, Wroughton,
near Swindon.

    Which awarding bodies offer it? All of them do.

    How widely available is it? Very. Virtually all schools and colleges do it.

LOAD-DATE: April 26, 2001


                             816 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2001 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                             April 20, 2001, Friday

SECTION: COMMENT; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 200 words

HEADLINE: LETTER: GENETIC RISKS

BYLINE: Dr Donald Bruce

BODY:


    Sir: I am concerned at the denial of the precautionary principle implicit in
James Watson's article on genetics ("Fixing the human embryo is the next step
for science", 16 April).

    He describes the scientists' voluntary 1970s moratorium on genetic
experiments while they evaluated the risks from the genetically modified
organisms they might create as "this painful episode". This suggests a
libertarian scientist who wants no regulations at all. As a former risk assessor
in the nuclear industry, I find his attitude highly irresponsible and quite out
of touch with the responsibility of scientists to the wider society.

    His article is also ill informed about regulation on genetic
experimentation. There are stringent regulations in many European countries. He
also makes no mention of the tragic deaths from somatic cell gene therapy that
have occurred.

    "Ensuring good genes dominate as many lives as possible" reminds me of what
happened in Germany 60 years ago. There are good reasons to fear any who would
apparently cull out of the population those they deem genetically unfit.

    Dr DONALD BRUCE

    Society, Religion and Technology Project

    Church of Scotland

    Edinburgh

LOAD-DATE: April 20, 2001


                             818 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2001 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            April 19, 2001, Thursday

SECTION: COMMENT; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 237 words

HEADLINE: LETTER: GOOD AND BAD EUGENICS

BYLINE: Dr Caroline Dryden

BODY:


    Sir: Your leading article (16 April) supports James Watson's call for the
law to be changed to allow germ line genetic engineering of human beings through
the genetic modification of human eggs or sperm. To allow this would be a grave
mistake.

    Currently, only somatic gene therapy (the genetic modification of any cells
apart from eggs and sperm) is permitted in the UK. The current push towards germ
line gene transfer from scientists such as Watson stems in part from the fact
that somatic gene therapy is not working. Despite ten years of research there
has been hardly any success to date and one trial resulted in a patient's death.

    To engineer reproductive cells will result in changes that will affect not
only the developing baby but any future offspring and successive generations.
Current lack of knowledge of gene function coupled with the unpredictable nature
of the techniques of gene transfer mean that a whole range of potentially
devastating medical outcomes could be produced that we would be powerless to
correct.

    Germ line gene transfer is not only dangerous, it also raises a number of
serious social and ethical issues concerning what we consider to be a "normal"
human being and who gets to decide. We should not be seduced by the hype from
commercial interests and narrow-thinking scientists.

    Dr CAROLINE DRYDEN

    Senior Researcher

    GeneWatch UK

    Tideswell, Derbyshire

LOAD-DATE: April 19, 2001


                             821 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2001 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                           April 18, 2001, Wednesday

SECTION: COMMENT; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 146 words

HEADLINE: LETTER: IMPROVING OUR GENES

BYLINE: Phil Cohen

BODY:


    Sir: James Watson seems to be arguing for an updated form of eugenics based
on individual wellbeing rather than the "future of the race" ("Fixing the human
embryo is the next step for science", 16 April).

    But for the foreseeable future, gene therapy is likely to be available only
to a tiny minority in the advanced Western countries. This will have the effect
of widening the gulf between those who are able to control their own destinies
and those who cannot. Under present circumstances this division is bound to take
on overtones of race as well as class.

    A redistribution of life chances across the world population would require a
quite different set of strategies from those currently driving genetic
engineering. Unfortunately Watson, like most geneticists, is silent on this
point.

    Professor PHIL COHEN

    University of East London

    London E 16

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 2001


                             824 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2001 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                             April 16, 2001, Monday

SECTION: TITLE PAGE; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 370 words

HEADLINE: LET US RID SOCIETY OF GENETIC DEFECTS, SAYS DNA PIONEER

BYLINE: Steve Connor Science Editor

BODY:


    JAMES WATSON, the "father" of DNA science, has called for the law to be
changed so that scientists can alter the genes of sperm, eggs and embryos and so
rid genetic defects from future generations.

    Dr Watson, who with Francis Crick shared a Nobel prize for the discovery of
the DNA double helix in 1953, says that fears over the creation of "designer
babies" are misplaced and that the potential benefits of controlling the
ultimate engine of human evolution far outweigh the risks.

    Altering the genes of sperm, eggs and embryos - so-called germ-line gene
therapy - is specifically outlawed in Britain, America and many other countries,
ostensibly because of the risks of meddling with genetic material and
introducing possible side-effects that will be passed on to subsequent
generations. There are also ethical and moral concerns about tinkering with
human DNA to improve a family's genetic stock either by eliminating "bad" genes
or introducing "good" ones. Critics say it raises the spectre of eugenics, as
practised by the Nazis.

    Dr Watson, who played a formative role in the human genome project and is
president of the prestigious Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory in New York, argues
passionately in The Independent today for society to review its opposition to
germ-line gene therapy.

    "I strongly favour controlling our children's genetic destinies. Working
intelligently and wisely to see that good genes dominate as many lives as
possible is the truly moral way for us to proceed," Dr Watson writes.

    Answering those who even oppose the genetic modification of plants and
animals, he says: "To my knowledge, not one illness, much less fatality, has
been caused by a genetically manipulated organism."

    Attempts to prevent germ-line gene therapy on humans are reminiscent of the
measures designed to limit the use of DNA manipulation 25 years ago when
scientists agreed to a temporary moratorium on the technology, Dr Watson says.

    "The moral I draw from this painful episode is this: never postpone
experiments that have clearly defined future benefits for fear of dangers that
cannot be quantified," he says.

    Leading article,

    Review, page 3;

    James Watson,

    Review, page 5

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 2001


                             825 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2001 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                             April 16, 2001, Monday

SECTION: COMMENT; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 906 words

HEADLINE: FIXING THE HUMAN EMBRYO IS THE NEXT STEP FOR SCIENCE;
 'ONE SHOULD NEVER PUT OFF DOING SOMETHING USEFUL FOR FEAR OF EVIL THAT MAY
NEVER ARRIVE'

BYLINE: James Watson

BODY:


    GENES TODAY too often get a bad press. This is not surprising because there
are "bad" genes as well as "good" ones, and bad news grips readers more than
good news. Bad genes are actually mutated good genes that, because of altered
DNA messages, do not function normally. One particularly bad gene leads to
Huntington's disease, which progressively destroys key nerve cells.

    Until recently, there was no way to isolate and characterise bad genes. They
were known only for their consequence disease. Now we have powerful new ways for
studying DNA, which are releasing a flood of new information about the faulty
genes implicated in virtually every major human disease: cancer, diabetes,
asthma, etc.

    With almost routine ways now available to test DNA samples for the presence
of specific mutant genes, there is increased anxiety that a person's genetic
heritage may become vulnerable to unwanted prying. The DNA from a single hair
may be enough to alert a prospective employer or insurer to a genetic
predisposition to disease. We need broad privacy laws to prevent genetic tests
without the informed consent of the person. Even so, dilemmas will arise when
people fail to grasp the potential significance of such test results. They can
warn but not cure. Who wants to know for sure they will contract a disease for
which there is no cure?

    Banishing genetic disability must therefore be our primary concern. We would
not worry about testing for a predisposing gene for Alzheimer's disease if we
had the cure. Such a test might allow drug therapy to begin before brain
function is irreversibly diminished.

    We may never, however, be able to control even a majority of serious genetic
diseases. All too many are likely to prove intractable to drug therapy as well
as to gene therapy, in which good genes are introduced into adult cells to
compensate for bad ones. It may be particularly difficult to compensate for
genes that malfunction during foetal development. If key genes controlling the
networking of brain cells fail to come into action in the womb, no conceivable
therapy is likely to rewire the brain later.

    So should steps be taken to prevent the birth of genetically impaired
children? Many people are opposed for religious reasons to attempt to control
the genetic destinies of children. Others, for political reasons, have an
abhorrence of gene-based decisions. But I strongly favour controlling our
children's genetic destinies.

    Working intelligently and wisely to see that good genes dominate as many
lives as possible is the truly moral way for us to proceed. Yet, no sooner had
scientists at Stanford University in 1973 begun rearranging DNA molecules in
test tubes and reinserting the novel DNA segments back into living cells, than
there were cries from scientists as well as non- scientists that such research
might best be ruled by stringent regulation - if not laws.

    As a result, several years were to pass before the full power of
recombinant- DNA technology - "genetic engineering" - got into the hands of
working scientists. By then they were itching to explore previously unattainable
secrets of life, like the bad genes behind cancer. To my knowledge, not one
illness, much less fatality, has been caused by a genetically- manipulated
organism.

    The moral I draw from this painful episode is this: Never postpone
experiments that have clearly defined future benefits for fear of dangers that
cannot be quantified. We can react rationally only to real, not to hypothetical,
risks.

    Most forms of DNA manipulation are now effectively unregulated. But one
important potential goal remains blocked. Experiments aimed at learning how to
insert functional genetic material into human germ cells - sperm and eggs -
remain off limits for most of the world's scientists. No governmental body wants
to take responsibility for initiating steps that might help redirect the course
of human evolution.

    These decisions reflect widespread concerns that we, as humans, may not have
the wisdom to modify the most precious of all human treasures - our chromosomal
instruction books. Dare we be entrusted with improving upon the results of
several million years of Darwinian natural selection?

    Unlike many of my peers, I am reluctant to accept such reasoning. I believe
one should never put off doing something useful for fear of evil that may never
arrive. The first germ-line gene manipulations are unlikely to be attempted for
frivolous reasons. Nor does the state of today's science provide the knowledge
that would be needed to generate "superpersons" whose far-ranging talents would
make those who are genetically unmodified feel unwanted. Such creations will
remain denizens of science fiction, not the real world, far into the future.

    When such experiments are eventually attempted, it will probably be to try
to change a death sentence into a life verdict. For example, it might be tried
to create children who are resistant to a deadly virus. This has already been
done with plants. Moving forward will not be for the faint of heart. But if this
century witnesses failure, let it be because our science is not yet up to the
job, and not because we don't have the courage to try to make less random the
sometimes most unfair courses of human evolution.

    The writer shared the 1962 Nobel prize for the discovery of the structure of
DNA with Francis Crick and Maurice Wilkins

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 2001


                             828 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2001 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                             April 2, 2001, Monday

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 1050 words

HEADLINE: A FAMILY AFFAIR: 'I'M NOT WAITING AROUND FOR A CURE'

BYLINE: Lena Corner

BODY:


    Janet Jacques's son Adam, 22, has cystic fibrosis. Janet has spent all of
her time looking after him, and is now an active fundraiser and family-support
service worker for the Cystic Fibrosis Trust. After graduating from Warwick
University last year, Adam set off to spend a year backpacking round Australia

    Janet

    Adam wasn't diagnosed with cystic fibrosis until he was three years old. As
a baby, he cried all the time. I took him to the doctor and was just told,
"babies do cry, you know". I started to think I was doing something wrong, but
my instinct told me it was something else, so I kept going back. I was phoning
the doctor weekly, if not daily. Adam never slept, I just fed him and fed him
and he lost weight all the time. I felt absolutely worn out. It was terrible.

    So when the diagnosis did come, it was a relief. It wasn't an illness I knew
much about, so I rushed to the library to find out more. I decided that no
matter what happened, I was going to deal with it. It has been incredibly
wearing, though. In order to help Adam, I've had to become totally immersed in
cystic fibrosis, and incredibly well-read on it.

    The reality of it is that every single day, 365 days a year, Adam has had to
go through a very harsh regime of treatment. Every day, he'd have to be up at
six for an hour of physiotherapy before school to help clear his lungs and
prevent infection. Then he'd have to go on a nebuliser to spray a film of
antibiotics on to his lungs. And then, because cystic fibrosis sufferers need to
have a very high-calorie diet, I'd make sure he had a large cooked breakfast.
And before he ate anything, he'd have to have enzyme tablets to help break down
the food - he'd have up to 50 a day. Then he'd go off and have a completely
normal day at school.

    The more cystic-fibrosis sufferers eat, the better they are, so I've had to
cook like a lunatic for him. He'd have a three-course meal every night. Then
he'd do more physio and have another go on the nebuliser. He was never allowed a
day that wasn't like this. From time to time, he'd have to go into hospital.
It's easy to become institutionalised, where the illness takes over everything,
but I decided he wasn't going to be like that. I would get work from school for
him so he wouldn't fall behind, and Clare, his sister, would come in and they
would study together. I used to worry about her because of all the attention I
had to give to Adam, but she's always been very supportive. She's amazing. Every
lunchtime, I'd take him to one of the nearby museums and every night we'd skip
the hospital food and go out for dinner. At the time, I was so driven I didn't
think about my own feelings, but I think Adam got a bit down, though he never
complained.

    When he announced that he was going to go to Australia for nine months, I
was terribly anxious, but I thought this may be his only chance to do it.
Travelling anywhere for that amount of time is very unusual for people with
cystic fibrosis, and to start with, I thought it would be impossible. Organising
the amount of drugs he needs was a logistical nightmare, and it was difficult to
find insurance and an airline willing to fly him, but in the end we conquered
it.

    It feels a bit strange not having to think about him all the time, not
cooking all those dinners, but I am pleased for him. I've done my job for him,
he's on the other side of the world, and he's looking after himself.

    My only goal in life now is to keep him as well as possible until a cure
comes. Considering this is the most common inherited illness, I'm outraged that
there is no government funding for cystic fibrosis. If enough money is raised,
there's a strong chance that there will be a cure. I suppose that that is what
keeps me going. There is nothing else on the horizon.

    Adam

    The first thing that I remember about having cystic fibrosis is the
physiotherapy. I had to do it for hours every day, but otherwise I don't think I
thought too much about it, and I never felt that different from my friends. When
I was at primary school, I had to go in and out of hospital a lot. It made me
feel special, because my friends would visit me, and when I got home I would
always get loads of cards and a big welcome.

    But as I got older, I started to resent it. I realised that I was never
going to be in tiptop health and that made me feel crap. I used to play quite a
lot of rugby, but one of the medicines that I was on, after long periods,
weakens your bones. I injured my back slightly so it didn't seem like a good
idea to carry on.

    When I stopped playing sport, my health started going downhill and the
spells in hospital got longer. Once, I was in for six weeks. My teenage years
were quite crap. My friends started going through changes and it didn't affect
me because I was in and out of hospital. But after the age of 16, things got
better, and I did my GCSEs and went off to university.

    After my finals, I decided to take a year out and go backpacking. My mum was
against it at first - she thought it couldn't be done. Then, when I started
getting disillusioned with the idea, she said, "no, we can do this", and after a
very big juggling act, she managed to sort it out, and I set off last November.

    At the moment, there are nine types of drug that I have to take every day,
and one of them needs to be refrigerated at all times, so it has been difficult.
I'm leaving Sydney in four days for Cairns, to learn how to surf. I can fit
seven weeks' supply in my backpack and as long as I manage to get to a hostel
each night, I'll be alright. Then I'll get another lot sent out from Sydney. I
know mum was worried, she always is, but she knows I'm having a good time. She's
finally learned how to send text messages, so we're in regular contact.

    I think a cure for cystic fibrosis is definitely on the cards; it's a
genetic issue and advances in gene therapy have been dramatic. They've already
found a way of correcting the gene in mice and, temporarily at least, I believe,
in people. It will happen, it's just a question of when. So I am hopeful, but
I'm not waiting around. I'm just going to get on with what I'm doing.

    Cystic Fibrosis week runs until 8 April. For information, call the Cystic
Fibrosis Trust on 020-8464 7211

GRAPHIC: Janet Jacques with her son, Adam, who is now 22 and, despite cystic
fibrosis, is backpacking across Australia

LOAD-DATE: April 2, 2001


                             834 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2001 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            March 13, 2001, Tuesday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 438 words

HEADLINE: AMBITIOUS OXFORD BIOMEDICA SEEKS POUNDS 37M FROM CITY

BYLINE: Katherine Griffiths

BODY:


    OXFORD BIOMEDICA, the cancer treatment specialist, is braving current market
conditions with a plan to raise up to pounds 37m ahead of its full listing next
month.

    The AIM-listed company, which is headed by the husband and wife team of Alan
and Susan Kingsman, said the money would be used to establish a physical
presence in the US and to further its cancer and gene research.

    Oxford BioMedica aims to raise pounds 27m net via a placing of 54.55 million
new shares at 55p, which has been fully underwritten by Beeson Gregory and
Rothschild. It has also launched an open offer for shareholders at the same
price, which could raise pounds 10m.

    The announcement of the share placing was expected, but analysts were
surprised that the level of fund-raising was so high. "This is at the top end of
the range they were looking at. It is bold, but it has been well received by
institutions," one analyst said.

    The fund-raising comes ahead of a full listing of Oxford BioMedica on 17
April. The company's shares fell 9 per cent to 64.5p yesterday, valuing the
company at pounds 111m. For the year to 31 December, Oxford BioMedica deepened
its annual losses from pounds 4.4m to pounds 5.9m.

    Some pounds 9m will be used to set up an operating unit in San Diego with
between 20 and 30 people. The company hopes this unit will be key to getting the
go-ahead for clinical trials in America and for establishing potentially
lucrative deals with US pharmaceutical and biotechnology companies.

    Tough market conditions forced another UK biotech - Scottish heart valve
maker AorTech International - to pull its offering last week.

    Oxford BioMedica, which had pounds 11.6m of cash at the end of 2000, expects
its funding needs over the next two years will total pounds 28m. Cash burn in
2000 was pounds 5.6m.

    Andrew Wood, finance director of Oxford BioMedica, said that this tranche of
fund-raising was unlikely to be the last time the company approached the market
for capital. "If everything went swimmingly it would be conceivable that this
would be enough, but it would be irresponsible to say that this is the most
likely option," Mr Wood said.

    However, Mr Wood stressed that this was the first time that Oxford BioMedica
was able to raise such a substantial sum, allowing it to plan for the next three
years. The company has raised a total of pounds 30m to date through five
placings.

    As well as spending pounds 9m in the US, pounds 12m will go to further
research in gene therapy and gene-based immunotherapy. A further pounds 6m will
be invested in pre-clinical and clinical product development.

GRAPHIC: Alan Kingsman, left, and Andrew Wood: Planning US expansion John;
Lawrence

LOAD-DATE: March 14, 2001


                             843 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2001 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                           February 16, 2001, Friday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 558 words

HEADLINE: COLD-SORE VIRUS OFFERS HOPE OF NEW TREATMENT FOR DEADLY SKIN CANCER
TREATMENT

BYLINE: Jeremy Laurance Health Editor

BODY:


    ONE OF the world's leading experts on skin cancer has developed a treatment
for malignant melanoma, the lethal disease linked with sunbathing, that has
shown promising results in early trials.

    Professor Rona MacKie said she was encouraged by the results. It involved
using the herpes simplex virus, which causes cold sores, to attack the cancer.

    Five patients with advanced melanoma, which originates in moles on the skin,
were treated with the disabled virus. It was injected into the centre of the
lesions. After between two and eight weeks the lesions were surgically removed
and examination showed the virus had destroyed the cancer cells.

    Professor MacKie, who is urging caution over the interpretation of the
results, said: "We have shown that when the virus comes into contact with the
melanoma cells it kills them. The beauty of it is that the virus is selective -
it was particularly attracted to the melanoma cells and did not attack other
cells. So we have a useful target here."

    Malignant melanoma is one of the fastest rising cancers and is triggered by
intermittent exposure to the sun. It is most common in office workers who spend
two weeks a year on a beach holiday. There were 4,690 cases in England and Wales
in 1997, 26 per cent up on 1990. Unlike other skin cancers, which are easily
curable, malignant melanoma is lethal if not caught early. It killed 1,474
people in England and Wales in 1999.

    The only treatment is surgery to remove the cancerous lesions from the skin,
which can halt the disease in its early stages. But once the cancer has spread
there are no proven, effective treatments available.

    The preliminary study led by Professor Mackie, known as a Phase 1 trial, was
fast-tracked for publication in today's edition of The Lancet medical journal
because of its potential importance. It was designed to test only the safety of
the herpes virus treatment but the results showed it could work, too. The next
stage would be to consider better ways of administering the treatment, she said.

    "We have a proof of principle here - that the virus can kill the cancer
cells. The next task is to think about how we give it; which patients at which
stage of the disease might benefit most from the treatment. I am encouraged but
it is very early days. We have proved we can damage this cancer. Now we have to
work out ways in which we can damage it better."

    Professor MacKie, who has held the chair of dermatology at the University of
Glasgow for 22 years, said she had been moved by the deaths of her first
patients from melanoma in the 1960s. She now has a research chair devoted
exclusively to investigation of the disease.

    "It struck me that of all the problems I saw in dermatology melanoma was the
most important," she said. "What makes it important to my mind is that it
attacks young people. You get it at 40 rather than 70 and although it is sad to
die at any age it is particularly sad to see the young die."

    The Imperial Cancer Research Fund welcomed the finding but warned that it
should not raise false hopes. Dr David Kirn, head of the charity's viral and
genetic therapy programme, said: "This is the first part of a phase 1 clinical
trial reporting on only five patients so much work remains to be done. Any
practical benefits for patients are still a long way off."

LOAD-DATE: February 16, 2001


                             848 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2001 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            February 9, 2001, Friday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 870 words

HEADLINE: GENETICS: DESIGNER BABIES 'WILL BE CREATED BEFORE 2030';
 WITHIN 30 YEARS, SCIENTISTS MAY BE TINKERING WITH GENES OF SPERM AND EGGS TO
PRODUCE 'MODIFIED' PEOPLE WITH ENHANCED TRAITS, SAYS EXPERT

BYLINE: Steve Connor Science Editor, In Lyons

BODY:


    A DISTURBING description of a brave new world filled with designer babies
created by scientists with a mission to control human evolution was painted
yesterday by one of the leaders of the effort to decode the human genome.

    Francis Collins, director of the US National Human Genome Research
Institute, believes that within 30 years there will be pressure on scientists to
tinker with the genes of sperm and eggs to create genetically modified human
embryos with enhanced traits. "I find this interesting but somewhat chilling,"
Dr Collins told the World Life Sciences Forum in Lyons, France. "It implies
someone knows what an improvement is and it also implies we could be sure enough
about the safety issues to contemplate altering our very biology."

    At present, only gene therapy is allowed on "somatic" non-reproductive
tissue and Dr Collins supports the existing moratorium on so-called "germline"
gene therapy on eggs, sperm and embryos because of safety concerns.

    "Perhaps in 20 years we may have learnt how to practise gene therapy in the
germline that is safe. Right know we don't know how to do that. But if we were
successful in another 20 years it will be contemplated in a more serious way,"
he said.

    "I wouldn't be surprised that if in 30 years of being successful in this
business of how to manipulate the germline, that some people will start to
argue, as Stephen Hawking already has, that we ought to take charge of our own
evolution and we should not be satisfied with our biological status and should
as a species try to improve ourselves."

    Genetic enhancement cannot be done safely and predictably at present. Dr
Collins said: "The well-heeled couple who decided to do this today to have a
child who is going to be a wonderful musician and an artist may find instead
that the child grows into a sullen adolescent who smokes marijuana and doesn't
talk to them."

    But with the full sequence of the human genome expected to be finished
within two years, a new era of genetic understanding has begun. "If all goes
well, then perhaps the average life span will be extended to something like 90
years which will put great stress on our social and economic system," Dr Collins
said. "By 2010 we would have uncovered the hereditary contributions to most of
the common diseases that are frequent in our society and we will have genetic
tests for at least a dozen of those."

    Also within the next 10 years, a technique which is called pre-implantation
genetic diagnosis, when genes are tested in an early IVF embryo before the
embryo is put into the womb, will be widespread for a range of genetic
disorders. "Pre-implantation diagnosis will undoubtedly be practised in more
centres and what conditions this will be applied for will be fiercely debated
over the coming years," Dr Collins said.

    To counter the possibility of a genetic underclass being created as a result
of testing for defective genes, Dr Collins called for effective legislation to
prevent genetic discrimination. "(It) should be in place in 10 years and I hope
we won't have to wait nearly that long," he said.

    By 2020, Dr Collins said, the common practice will be for patients to
undergo a battery of genetic tests before they are prescribed tailor-made drugs
to suit their individual make-up.

    "We are certainly close to understanding the hereditary contributions to
manic depressive illness, to schizophrenia and to obsessive compulsive disorder
in a way that should at last lead to a better biological understanding of mental
disorders," Dr Collins said.

    "In 2030, if all goes well, we should have achieved a comprehensive,
genomics -based healthcare with individualised medicine instead of the
one-size-fits-all approach."

    HOW DNA CODE WAS CRACKED

    1863: Gregor Mendel discovers traits are passed from parents to progeny in
discreet units, which are now known as genes.

    1940: Oswald Avery discovers that the "transforming factor" of genes is
composed of deoxyribonucleic acid.

    1953: Francis Crick, James Watson and others reveal the double-helix
structure of DNA.

    1966: The genetic code, composed of four "letters" of the DNA alphabet is
cracked showing the relationship between genes and the proteins they help to
create.

    1976: Tools of DNA manipulation are applied for the first time to an
inherited human disorder: alpha thalassemia.

    1984: The location of the defective gene responsible for an inherited
condition in humans - Huntington's disease - is identified.

    1986: The Human Genome Project is established.

    1988: The US Congress funds the Human Genome Project, which becomes the
"official" attempt to decode the entire sequence of human DNA.

    1992: A rival attempt to sequence the human genome is established by Craig
Venter, who defects from the project to set up a company called Celera.

    1999: The first complete sequence of a human chromosome is announced by
British scientists at the Sanger Centre in Cambridge, part of the Human Genome
Project.

    2000: The first working draft of the human genome is produced with more than
90 per cent of the sequence complete.

    2001: First detailed sequence maps published by the private and public
sector projects.

GRAPHIC: Decoding DNA, above, will take two years, says Dr Francis Collins,
right, but the medical ethics must be settled Reuters

LOAD-DATE: February 9, 2001


                             851 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2001 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            February 5, 2001, Monday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 315 words

HEADLINE: UNIVERSITY SWAPS GENE RIGHTS FOR STAKE IN BIOMEDICA

BYLINE: Chris Hughes

BODY:


    KING'S COLLEGE London is taking a stake in Oxford BioMedica, the UK's
leading gene therapy company, in a collaboration aimed at developing treatments
for spinal injury.

    OB is paying pounds 180,000, mainly in shares, to gain exclusive use of a
gene discovered by the London University college. It will use its gene delivery
technology to develop products to repair nerves in disorders associated with
diabetes and vascular disease, as well as spinal injury.

    OB is making an up-front payment to Kings, to be followed by further
payments on completion of specified milestones. Kings is investing pounds
150,000 in OB at 73.4p a share. Structuring the deal in this way avoids a costly
valuation of the gene, which is required for any purchase of an asset using
shares directly. The stock closed at 75p on Friday.

    The gene, which is switched on in embryos and foetuses, is normally inactive
in adults. Researchers at Kings, led by Professor Malcolm Maden, have found it
restores the ability of nerve cells to grow after injury when it is reactivated
in adults. OB's technology allows the gene to stay reactivated for a sustained
period of time.

    "'You don't need this gene as an adult - unless you hit a lamp post when you
fall off your bike. But people mustn't think that we are suddenly going to be
able to make Christopher Reeve walk," said Professor Alan Kingsman, OB's chief
executive.

    OB and Kings said they would also be working together to identify more genes
associated with nerve regeneration. Kings' other commercial interest in
neurology include its stake in ReNeuron, the stem cell company established by
former Kings researchers that floated on the Alternative Investment Market last
year. Professor Kingsman said further collaborations with Kings were likely.

    OB is expected to raise up to pounds 20m when it moves from AIM to the main
market this year.

LOAD-DATE: February 5, 2001


                             854 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2001 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                           January 27, 2001, Saturday

SECTION: COMMENT; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 702 words

HEADLINE: MONITOR: STEM CELL RESEARCH;
 UK NEWSPAPERS REACTION TO THE VOTE IN THE HOUSE OF LORDS THAT PERMITS THE
CLONING OF HUMAN EMBRYOS

BYLINE: Research By Ben Chu

BODY:


    Daily Mail

    SO, THE Lords have voted to allow the cloning of human embryos for medical
research. But at least they powerfully made the case that it is utterly wrong to
make such a momentous change without an exhaustive debate beforehand - one that
examines not only the scientific aspects, but the ethical and moral aspects too.
Yet, the Government has railroaded legislation through Parliament. Now Ministers
have had their way in the Lords - even though the Archbishop of Canterbury, and
the heads of the Roman Catholic, Jewish and Moslem faiths pleaded publicly for a
delay so that the issue could be properly discussed. But in trying to ensure
such a debate, the unelected Lords at least showed themselves, once again, to be
acutely sensitive to the concerns of the public.

    The Guardian

    USUALLY RATIONAL people such as Baroness Warnock have warned about the
"evil" of reproductive cloning, that spectre looming at the back of every
therapeutic cloning debate. Allow one, and surely we're on the road to the
other, despite the fact that under present proposals reproductive cloning would
continue to be clearly banned. Watch out, the slippery slopers warn, we are
about to permit the creation of Frankenstein babies. To evoke the imaginations
of an early 19th-century novelist and a late 20th- century Hollywood filmmaker
as evidence in a parliamentary debate would be considered ridiculous in any
other area. Frankenstein is fiction. And those who may want to clone are far
from mad scientists. The real reason someone might want to reproduce themselves
is infertility. (Dea Birkett)

    The Daily Telegraph

    EVEN SUPPORTERS of therapeutic cloning are alarmed by the "undemocratic"
tactics to which the Government has resorted in order to "shovel" this order
through Parliament, to use the words of Lady Warnock in this newspaper last
week. The Government has responded by proposing that such a committee be set up
after the order has become law. The unelected chamber has become a more
effective forum for democratic debate than the elected one. It is above all on
moral issues - the age of consent, Section 28, hunting - that the House of Lords
has the right to speak for the nation in defiance of the Government.

    Evening Standard

    BRITAIN'S ELECTED chamber is today the poodle of the most powerful peacetime
Prime Minister in memory. The parliamentary opposition is moribund, and likely
to remain so even after the General Election. That is why a vigorous upper
chamber is so necessary. It provides a centre of political power that the
Government cannot take for granted. New Labour, and even Mr Blair himself, may
consider themselves divine instruments, but they are not infallible. There is
only one word for a society governed by the will of a single political leader,
and it is not democracy.

    Daily Express

    IS IT the slippery slope to creating actual babies by cloning? Some fear it
is. But health minister Lord Hunt stressed the ban on "reproductive cloning"
would remain and the Government would toughen laws to make 100 per cent sure.
What benefits will come from the research? Backers say it could help cure
degenerative brain disorders such as Parkinson's, Alzheimer's and Huntingdon's
and illnesses such as cancer. Depending on the chemical signals they get, stem
cells can grow into any cells for any part of the human body - muscle, organs,
nerves, skin or bone.

    The Times

    IT MAY be a cliche to cite opposition to vaccination, anaesthetics and
reproductive technology as evidence of past anti-science bigotry. (Not until her
final confinement did Queen Victoria feel strong enough - or weak enough - to
defy public opinion and try chloroform.) But stem-cell research is certain to
advance by leaps and bounds and a ban is useless since cloned cells can be
transported across borders. However wrong it may seem to some, genetic therapy
will soon become a matter of lifestyle choice. One day identical twins will be
created, and be seen as no different from natural ones (which are clones).
People will store their eggs, their sperm, their brain cells. They will want new
organs, transplanted or cloned. And there will always be money in it. (Simon
Jenkins)

LOAD-DATE: January 27, 2001


                             855 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2001 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                           January 23, 2001, Tuesday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 310 words

HEADLINE: PARTNERS TO DEVELOP CANCER ANTIBODIES

BYLINE: Chris Hughes

BODY:


    THE BIOTECH sector gained a boost yesterday as Oxford BioMedica, the gene
therapy group, and XTL Pharmaceuticals, the antibodies specialist, unveiled
partnership deals to develop antibodies that combat cancer.

    Oxford BioMedica is to collaborate with American Home Products (AHP), the US
drugs giant, in antibody-based cancer therapies. The company said the deal was
potentially worth $ 24m (pounds 16m) in upfront payments and fees for options on
licences that depended on it achieving certain milestones. In return, AHP will
receive exclusive development and global marketing rights for an Oxford
BioMedica antibody when applied to all cancer conditions. AHP will also
manufacture the antibody if it becomes a product.

    Both Oxford BioMedica's compound and AHP's technology are by-products of
existing research programmes.

    Professor Alan Kingsman, the chief executive, said: "This deal gives us an
important revenue stream while allowing us to concentrate resources on our own
development programmes."

    The City gave the deal a lukewarm reception, sending the shares up 1p to
76p. Some analysts said the value of the deal lay too far into the future for it
to make much of an impact on the company's valuation.

    "The royalty rate will not have been that huge," said Julie Simmonds, an
analyst at Beeson Gregory, Oxford BioMedica's house broker. "But this validates
the group's technology and shows the firm can do deals with important
companies."

    Separately, XTL Pharmaceuticals, based in Israel but listed in London, and
Dyax Corp, a Nasdaq-listed rival, said they were pooling resources to discover,
develop, and commercialise monoclonal antibodies to treat fungal infections and
some cancers. Dyax, which is capitalised at $ 330m, licenses antibody technology
to Cambridge Antibody Technology. XTL shares closed up 5p at 141.5p.

GRAPHIC: Alan Kingsman: 'This deal gives us an important revenue stream'; John
Lawrence

LOAD-DATE: January 23, 2001


                             860 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2001 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            January 19, 2001, Friday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 302 words

HEADLINE: THE INVESTMENT COLUMN: ML LABS

BYLINE: Edited By Chris Hughes

BODY:


    KEVIN LEECH, the chairman of ML Laboratories, is at a loss to know why the
stock market doesn't care for the biotechnology group's shares.

    Yesterday he appointed NM Rothschild, the investment bank, to investigate
how to get the share price up. ML Labs is in some hot healthcare areas, ranging
from gene therapy to Aids. But it has struggled to find favour with investors
and it's not hard to see why.

    The firm posted annual losses once again yesterday, 13 years after flotation
and four years since moving to the main market. Investors with the 47 per cent
of ML that Mr Leech doesn't own have given up.

    ML's results evidenced its problems. The flotation of Innovata Biomed, a
subsidiary that develops inhaled drugs, has been delayed until markets regain
their enthusiasm for new share issues. Research and development costs spiralled
- administration costs rose too - helping pre-tax losses touch pounds 11.8m.
ML's cashburn shows no sign of easing. The group is setting up a convertible
bond to raise up to pounds 21m, having extracted pounds 11.5m from shareholders
only last year.

    ML has a crowded portfolio to show for all this, although only two
programmes appear to offer much promise. Adept, a treatment for post-operative
adhesions, already launched in the UK, faces a market worth $ 2.5bn (pounds
1.7bn), although WestLB Panmure, the house broker, expects its sales will peak
at just $ 60m in 2007. Then there's Cobra, the recently acquired gene therapy
unit, whose day lies somewhere in the back-end of the decade. Sales of Adept,
and a likely milestone payment on development of Viraldon, ML's Aids drug, could
see ML break even in 2002 but don't count on it.

    The shares closed down 10.5p at 103.5p yesterday, valuing ML at pounds 163m.
Retail investors should steer clear.

LOAD-DATE: January 19, 2001


                             863 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2001 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            January 12, 2001, Friday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 880 words

HEADLINE: HOW A GLOWING MONKEY WILL HELP CURE DISEASE

BYLINE: Steve Connor

BODY:


    ANDI, THE first genetically modified monkey, was introduced to the world
yesterday. Scientists said the GM primate could herald a revolution in the
understanding and treatment of hitherto incurable human diseases.

    Andi, a rhesus macaque, was born last October after cutting-edge research
successfully manipulated his genetic material to include a gene for a green
fluorescent dye.

    Scientists used the green dye gene, extracted from a jellyfish, as a marker
to show "proof of principle" that monkeys can be genetically modified. They now
intend to produce GM monkeys with genes added or taken away so they can emulate
human diseases, such as breast cancer, Parkinson's or diabetes.

    But the breakthrough has raised fresh ethical concerns about the direction
of genetic research, with some leading scientists calling for further
experiments to be subject to strict controls.

    "Although medical benefits may result from producing GM monkeys, this sort
of work must be subject to stringent monitoring of any harmful effects on the
animals' welfare," said Professor Patrick Bateson, chairman of the Royal
Society's working group on GM animals

    Andi was the result of 224 separate attempts to modify the genes of
unfertilised macaque eggs. The research produced 40 embryos and five
pregnancies, but only one of the three live births was a GM baby. A set of GM
macaque twins was stillborn.

    In addition to understanding human diseases, GM monkeys could provide
valuable insights into how human embryos grow in the womb and what can go wrong
during this crucial stage of development.

    Although many different species of animals, from rats and mice to sheep and
goats, have been genetically modified, this is the first time that man's closest
living relatives - the so-called non-human primates - have had their DNA
successfully manipulated.

    "Andi is frisky and plays normally with his two room mates," said Gerald
Shatten, who led the research team from the Oregon Regional Primate Research
Center in Beaverton, Oregon.

    The extra green dye gene was added using an emasculated virus, designed to
be non-infectious but still capable of inserting DNA into an unfertilised egg
cell, says the research report published in the journal Science.

    Professor Shatten says the same technique could be used to generate other
laboratory animals carrying genes associated with medical conditions affecting
humans.

    "We could just as easily introduce, for example, an Alzheimer's gene to
accelerate the development of a vaccine for that disease," Professor Shatten
said.

    "In this way we hope to bridge the scientific gap between transgenic mice
and humans. We could also get better answers from fewer animals, while
accelerating the discovery of cures through molecular medicine."

    But some scientific ethicists have drawn the line at using primates for
generating animal models of human diseases. "It's going a step to far," said
Donald Bruce, director of the Church of Scotland's society, religion and
technology project.

    "Primates are closer to humans, have a higher degrees of sentience and
consciousness and I think that justifies a higher degree of concern and respect
for them," he added.

    Andi - named after the reverse of Inserted DNA - has no visible effects of
being genetically modified. But when he gets older his body might begin to
produce the characteristic green fluorescent dye that was detected in the
toenails and hair shafts of the stillborn twins.

    His birth was an important step in proving that it is possible for man's
closest living relatives to survive genetic manipulation prior to fertilisation.
Further refinements of the technique might one day lead to calls for the genetic
manipulation of human eggs, although few scientists believe there are sound
medical reasons for allowing this.

    Genetic modification of human eggs and sperm - so called "germline gene
therapy" - is prohibited in Britain because of ethical concerns over the
possible dangers to the future health of a baby and because of fears that it
could lead to "designer babies".

    John Clark, head of the genetics division at the Roslin Institute near
Edinburgh, who pioneered the genetic modification of farmyard animals for
medical research, said that although the birth of Andi made it technically more
feasible to manipulate the DNA of human eggs or sperm, there was no
justification for doing so.

    "You can never say never but my views have not changed on this for 15
years," Dr Clark said. "But I wouldn't rule out it being done in another
country, although it would be awful if it was done."

    The Roslin Institute has pioneered the technique known as "pharming", where
valuable human proteins used in medicine are produced in the milk of GM sheep or
cows.

    Several "pharmed" drugs are in the final stages of clinical trials,
including a medicine for treating lung disease and cystic fibrosis produced in
the milk of GM ewes. "GM has been an extremely powerful and incredibly rewarding
technology for understanding basic science as well as for important medical
applications," Dr Clark said. "But as you advance up the tree of sentient
animals, you have to apply more stringent ethical and moral codes, especially
when using primates," he added.

GRAPHIC: Professor Shatten: 'Cures from molecular medicine'; Andi, the world's
first genetically modified rhesus monkey AP

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 2001


                             864 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2001 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            January 5, 2001, Friday

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 1063 words

HEADLINE: SCIENCE: DESIGNER DETERGENT CLEANS UP;
 TIRED OF GREY KNICKERS AND PINK SOCKS? AN NEW ENZYME DERIVED FROM A TOADSTOOL
IS GOING TO REVOLUTIONISE YOUR WASH.

BYLINE: Sanjida O'Connell

BODY:


    We've all experienced it, the tyranny of the single red sock that sneaks
into the laundry basket and dyes an entire load of underwear and white T-shirts
a delicate shade of pink. Now a company in the United States can put an end to
those dirty greys and hateful pinks; it has created an enzyme originally derived
from a toadstool which promises to eradicate stray dyes when washing coloured
items. What is new about this potential detergent is not so much what it does,
but how it was made: it was designed as a result of an evolutionary development
which used the basic principles of Charles Darwin's natural selection.

    Unlike normal evolution, however, there is an end point. The scientists are
literally watching evolution take place and steering it in the direction they
want it to go. Currently many new drugs are produced through rational design:
scientists determine what kind of molecular structure they are looking for, and
search for it or try to create it from natural products.

    Many large companies have had teams of researchers working on rational
design for years without a great deal of success. It is a difficult task
determining the structure of a chemical to begin with, let alone then having to
create a brand new protein and work out how it should fit together to perform
the task it has been set.

    About seven years ago, three post-doctoral students with little experience
in rational design got together and, in less than a year, they had made a
product which was a commercial success for Novo Nordisk, one of the largest
biotech firms in the business. Pim Stemmer, one of those post- docs and now the
Vice-President of research and development at Maxygen, a biotech company in
California, has patented his technique of evolving drugs. He calls it "molecular
breeding" and likens it to the way in which humans have bred many different
kinds of dogs. The difference is that Maxygen is merely breeding molecules.

    For great sex you need three things: mutation, recombination and repetition.
When an organism makes copies of its genes, errors sometimes occur, random
mutations in the genetic code. Usually these are deleterious, but occasionally
they can confer new, advantageous properties. Maxygen introduces mutations by
making many copies of the genetic material - DNA - that will encode for a
particular protein. The new, mutated genes are then inserted into an organism,
such as a yeast or a bacterium, and allowed to control the creation of a new
enzyme. This enzyme is tested to see if it is any more resistant to salt,
temperature, acidity, and so on. Several of these mutant enzymes may show some
of the characteristics the scientists are looking for; in the case of the new
detergent, they wanted enzymes that could withstand the high temperature and
harsh chemical environment of a washing machine.

    Each of these enzymes might have been produced by genes which had several
mutants, but only one mutant is the useful one. The other mutations could be
neutral or disadvantageous. The genes are then recombined - they are broken up
and mixed with each other in every possible combination, to simulate the genetic
mixing of sexual reproduction, when half the genes from a male are combined with
half the genes from a female.

    "You've allowed yourself to separate the good from the bad mutations," says
Joel Cherry, from the Californian based Novozymes, Maxygen's partner in
Molecular Breeding. "That's what's so great about sex."

    The other great thing about sex is the repetition. The genes are recombined
over and over again, and each new enzyme that is produced is tested. "The more
cycles you have, the better it works," says Cherry. In larger organisms it would
be the equivalent of individual animals becoming better suited to their
environment. In the case of the enzymes, better adapted to life in a washing
machine.

    It is a faster and more efficient process than trying to find enzymes to do
the right job in the natural world. "There are no washing machines in the field
packed full of microbes," says Cherry, "Organisms don't grow at 95C." Stemmer
gives the example of a gene which, in a few thousand cycles over the course of
three weeks, showed a 32,000-fold improvement.

    Most of the initial genetic material comes from microbes and other organisms
found around the area in which Novozymes and Maxygen work. Their genetic library
runs to hundreds of thousands of different kinds of genes. Diversa, another
California-based biotech company, concentrates on finding unusual natural
microbes, sending people to scour the globe for bacteria - from the skin of a
beached and rotting whale, for instance.

    Novozymes, one of the biggest producers of enzymes, uses them to create the
stone-wash effect in jeans, to soften leather and fabrics and to make high
-fructose corn syrup, as well as detergent and the enzyme, a "heme peroxidase"
from the ink-cap toadstool, which will prevent those stray red socks causing
chaos.

    Maxygen is involved in similar areas; the company bred subtilisin, an enzyme
that removes stains from clothes and is worth $ 4-5m. But they have also
branched out to agriculture and health. They created a new chemical to treat
cancer through chemotherapy, and an enzyme to be used in the manufacture of
penicillin.

    Currently the company is working on a vaccine against HIV and its work on
viral vectors for gene therapy was published last August in Nature. This is
where a defective gene or genes, which might cause Parkinson's disease for
instance, can be "corrected" by inserting a fully functioning gene. Making viral
vectors that insert these genes is difficult but Maxygen has made one that is a
hundred times better than existing vectors.

    Evolving enzymes is expensive though. "We are often competing against
chemical processes and these processes are not very green," says Stemmer. "It's
more environmentally friendly to use enzymes rather than solvents." Cherry is
more optimistic: he believes people will want industry to adopt manufacturing
processes that are potentially more environmentally friendly. "Molecular
Breeding will change the future of the biotech industry. It's a powerful way of
making enzymes so it's an incredible force for change," he says. And it's an
evolutionary force that has existed ever since life on Earth began more than 3
billion years ago.

GRAPHIC: Washday blues - mixing your colours will no longer end in tears

LOAD-DATE: January 5, 2001


                             865 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2001 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                           January 3, 2001, Wednesday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 1033 words

HEADLINE: BOWED BUT NOT BEATEN - THERE'S LIFE YET IN NEW ECONOMY;
 NEWS ANALYSIS: MARKETS ARE CLOSED TO TECHNOLOGY FUNDING FOR NOW, BUT THE IT
REVOLUTION IS HERE TO STAY

BYLINE: Diane Coyle Economics Editor

BODY:


    IS THE New Economy already history? That seems to be the message given by
plummeting hi-tech share prices and the mounting number of warnings about a
recession in the United States. The symbolic Nasdaq index fell 39 per cent in
2000, its biggest one-year drop since its 1971 launch. It started this year as
it ended last, shedding 124 points by midday yesterday.

    Recent industry figures suggest US dot.com companies axed 41,000 jobs in
December, cutbacks on a scale that might point to weak official jobs figures due
on Friday. Traders will be braced for another bout of selling if their fears of
a fresh sign of economic slowdown are indeed confirmed. European hi-tech markets
have certainly not escaped. The UK's FTSE techMARK 100 index was down 32 per
cent in 2000 while Germany's Neuer Markt shed two-thirds of its value.

    The worldwide share price crashes have made it next to impossible for many
hi -tech companies, floated in the sure knowledge they would need to return to
investors for extra funds, to find that additional cash. On the final trading
day of 1999, LetsBuyIt.com, a Neuer Markt-listed internet retailer, suspended
its shares saying it needed to raise about 80m euros, and was rewarded with a
fall of up to 69 per cent in its share price at one point after trading resumed
yesterday. QXL, the online auctioneer, has seen its shares drop to 8.25p
yesterday, from a peak of pounds 8 earlier in the year, despite securing extra
funding of pounds 30m. Privately many dot.com entrepreneurs admit they stand no
chance of finding the necessary finance unless technology stocks pick up soon.

    Telecoms companies around the world might face the same loss of investor
appetite after recent warnings that the sector is overburdened with debt, issued
in many cases to pay for new generation mobile phone licences. After the flop of
the 3.3bn euro (pounds 2.1bn) float of Telefonica Moviles in November other
expected offers, such as BT Wireless and Deutsche Telekom's subsidiary T-Mobile
were put on ice. France Telecom also plans to float a stake in the recently
acquired Orange early in 2001. If such offers prove disappointing they could put
the skids under the broader technology, media and telecoms sector once again.

    The tech crash on the world's stock markets follows the extraordinary gains
seen in the 18 months up to March 2000. For example, the Nasdaq gained 256 per
cent between its October 1998 low and its peak of 5,048.62 on 10 March 2000.
During that period, which many commentators described throughout as a bubble,
investors poured money into internet and dot.com and other TMT stocks. With
capital virtually free, there was over-investment, leaving a legacy of
over-capacity now.

    However, one of the biggest reasons for the change in sentiment about the
New Economy has been the emerging evidence of a slowdown in the US economy. The
statistics, so far, point to weaker growth rather than outright recession.
However, they could be lagging reality. Stephen Lewis, chief economist at
Monument Derivatives, said: "Computer sales were weak around the key
Thanksgiving and Christmas periods. But news like that will not yet be reflected
in the numbers." Yesterday's weaker-than-expected survey of manufacturing, from
the National Association of Purchasing Managers, suggested industrial output is
already contracting sharply.

    Weaker growth will undermine the key piece of evidence that had convinced
investors there was a 'new paradigm' justifying the high valuations they had put
on many shares: the upsurge in productivity. In the years since 1995 American
productivity has grown significantly faster than in the recent past, a
phenomenon attributed to the massive investment boom in computers and telecoms.

    Yet the belief that the business cycle had been abolished was bound to be
proved false at some point. Equally, it was always wrong to assume that the
share price bubble gave the full measure of the New Economy. If productivity
growth slows less in the coming downturn than it did in earlier ones, the
improvement in productivity over the full business cycle will remain intact.

    Almost every new technology has triggered an investment mania. Eventually,
exaggerated hopes of profit were disappointed because a competitive market
economy delivers the benefits of new technologies to consumers, not just
shareholders. When the dust cleared in earlier episodes the technology, whether
electricity, rail, cars or radio, remained to transform the economy.

    Many New Economy sceptics will still be secretly delighted about the dot.com
bust. One prominent critic, Professor Robert Gordon of Northwestern University,
has argued that e-tailing and mobile phones bear no comparison to the wave of
new technologies that delivered the golden era of growth. He lists electricity,
the internal combustion engine, petro-chemicals and pharmaceuticals,
entertainment and communications technologies, and indoor plumbing. How could
any amount of cost saving from business-to- business e-commerce compare with the
benefits of these?

    Such dismissive verdicts on the New Economy miss out a lot of other
important emerging technologies such as genomics, robotics, molecular computing
and nanotechnology, however. The potential for growth is not only about online
retailing but it is also about more than personal computers and telephones.

    From household robots, currently packaged as cute upmarket toy dogs or
butlers, to astonishing new genetic therapies, everyday life could well be
transformed. Professor Gordon's examples span the years 1844 (the telegraph) to
1911 (television). A similar 60-year period of innovation spanning the turn of
the 21st century will have produced an equally revolutionary set of new
technologies, all built on the foundations of the astonishing increase in power
and decline in price of microprocessors.

    The only possible verdict on the New Economy is that is is too soon to tell
whether these changes add up to a revolution. There is still every reason to
hope that, after ironing out the ups and downs of the economic cycle, long-run
growth rates can stay higher than their dismal late-20th century average.

GRAPHIC: Hiroyuki Yoshino, Honda chief executive, bows to a trio of Asimo
robots. The 120cm tall robot, which will be available to rent in Japan in the
autumn, is the first in the world to be able to change direction smoothly while
walking AP

LOAD-DATE: January 3, 2001


                             869 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                           December 5, 2000, Tuesday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 210 words

HEADLINE: OXFORD BIOTECHS DELIVER TWIN BOOST TO SECTOR

BYLINE: Chris Hughes

BODY:


    THE UK'S biotechnology sector gained a boost yesterday as Oxford
Glycosciences, the protein technology group, unveiled an alliance with Glaxo
Wellcome, and Oxford BioMedica, the gene therapy firm, said it had discovered a
new way of delivering genes to the brain.

    OGS shares rallied 22.5p in early trade, but closed 15p lower at 1,315p on
the back of a weak opening on the Nasdaq, as the City digested news that Glaxo,
the UK's largest drugs group, would fund research into proteomics related to
Glaxo's drugs franchises. Proteomics is the study of proteins implicated in
disease. OGS said it retain the rights to commercialise discoveries made in the
collaboration, although Glaxo would have exclusive rights to negotiate to
acquire them.

    Separately, Oxford BioMedica said it has developed gene delivery technology
that could lead to a breakthrough in the treatment of motor neurone disease. Its
Lentivector gene delivery system was capable not only of delivering genes to
neurones in the brain, but could also transport genes along the neurone to other
parts of the nervous system, OB said.

    OB said the discovery paved the way to unravelling the function of genes
specific to the brain and nervous system. The shares fell 0.5p to 65p.

LOAD-DATE: December 5, 2000


                             874 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                          November 23, 2000, Thursday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 302 words

HEADLINE: GENE INJECTIONS CAN CURE DIABETIC RATS

BYLINE: Steve Connor Science Editor

BODY:


    SCIENTISTS HAVE "cured" diabetic rats of their illness by injecting them
with synthetic genes that stimulated the production of insulin, the hormone that
helps to regulate blood sugar levels.

    The laboratory animals were able to control their glucose sugar levels for
eight months after gene therapy by producing their own insulin when it was
necessary.

    Scientists believe the findings pave the way for human gene therapy trials
using a similar approach whereby a genetically engineered virus is used to
insert the insulin-making gene into liver cells.

    A research team led by Ji-Won Yoon of Yonsei University in Seoul, South
Korea, and the University of Calgary in Canada, report in the journal Nature
that the rats recovered well and suffered no ill-effects.

    The insulin produced by the inserted genes was between 20 per cent and 40
per cent as effective as naturally produced insulin, they found. The technique
"may have potential therapeutic value for the cure of autoimmune diabetes in
humans", they said.

    Jerrold Olefsky, a medical researcher at the University of California at San
Diego, said the approach could offer a viable alternative to the current methods
of treating type 1 diabetes. The standard treatments focus on administering
insulin by regular injections, nasal sprays or external pumps.

    "But all of these methods suffer from inconvenience, interference with
lifestyle and, most important, the near impossibility of matching insulin
administration to the body's minute-to-minute needs," Dr Olefsky said.

    The gene therapy experiment on the rats produced impressive results, Dr
Olefsky said. "But rodents are quite different from humans with respect to
maintaining glucose levels, and extending these results to human physiology may
prove a challenge," he said.

LOAD-DATE: November 23, 2000


                             883 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                           October 19, 2000, Thursday

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 2, 3

LENGTH: 1898 words

HEADLINE: WE'RE IN THE MIDDLE OF A CHAIN REACTION;
 THE NUMBER OF STUDENTS OPTING FOR DEGREE COURSES IN 'DIFFICULT' SUBJECTS LIKE
CHEMISTRY IS NOSE-DIVING. IS THIS THE GOVERNMENT'S WORST LONG-TERM PROBLEM? BY
LUCY HODGES

BYLINE: Lucy Hodges

BODY:


    Britain is fast becoming a nation of film buffs and would-be journalists.
The latest figures on university admissions published last week chart the
inexorable rise of media studies and cinematics in our universities and the
decline of core sciences and languages.

    Year on year, we see increasing numbers of students opting for soft subjects
which allow them to waffle and interpret to their hearts' content, while the
hard subjects requiring what most scientists and linguists regard as serious
study and knowledge suffer. The area which has seen the biggest jump is
humanities with arts, a ragbag of a category permitting you to combine history,
say, with film. General science has also benefited from the desire by today's
youth to broaden and lighten the academic load.

    Chemistry, in particular, has taken a big knock, showing a drop of 11 per
cent in the number of students enrolling this year, but engineering combined
with technology is also down, as is double languages, physics, biology and
engineering. Subjects which have seen increases are the trendy ones - drama,
sports science, film, media studies and computer science.

    None of this surprises experts, because it is a continuing trend. It does,
however, depress them. There is concern about chemistry, because the chemical
industry, particularly pharmaceuticals, has been Britain's big manufacturing
success story. What will happen to it if numbers go on declining? "The drop
matters, because ultimately the advances that we see in health care, in the
environment, in better and alternative uses of energy come down to understanding
the world at the molecular level," says Tony Ashmore, registrar of the Royal
Society for Chemistry.

    Why are students turning their faces away from chemistry? The answer seems
to be that, like physics, it is a difficult subject - more so than a degree in a
humanities discipline. Modern languages are also regarded as difficult because
you have to memorise vocabulary and get your head round awkward sentence
structures. For obvious reasons, students would rather take a subject that is
rather less demanding intellectually, such as politics or the ubiquitous media
studies - particularly as the latter is seen as more glitzy.

    "A lot of young people want to work in the media," says Dr Richard Howells,
admissions tutor at the institute of communication studies at the University of
Leeds. "They see it as interesting, glamorous and exciting - and, of course, to
an extent it is. They think that studying the media is going to set them up for
an interesting career."

    Leeds has 1,387 applications for 130 places on its communication studies
degrees and asks for high A-level grades. Its courses are in demand, because
they are practical - giving training in television, news and communications -
and are offered by a highly regarded university.

    For the cognoscenti, of course, chemistry does have glamour. As the life
sciences have become more molecularly-based, chemistry has come into its own.
The Human Genome Project, for example, which is mapping every gene in our
bodies, will open up new areas of biotechnology and ensure that chemists are in
demand. They will help to explain how life works and how, if it goes wrong, we
will be able to put it back on track.

    The problem is that chemists are the backroom boys working behind the scenes
in the laboratory on drugs and gene therapies; they are not the people who deal
with the public. Thus their work is largely invisible. "It's the chemists who
make the drug that make you well," explains Mr Ashmore. "Unlike the journalist
or the doctor, they do not meet the public so people don't know what they're
doing."

    But glamour is not the only factor. The media are so central to today's
society that studying them means students are learning about the world in which
they live and the democratic process. "Students are beginning to realise that
the study of the media is much more of a necessity than a luxury," says Dr
Howells.

    The decline in admissions to chemistry degrees is also linked to another
educational crisis - the teacher recruitment shortage. It is difficult to entice
graduates of physics, chemistry and maths into teaching because they can do so
much better in the City or accountancy. Therefore, numbers signing up for PGCE
courses are declining. The numbers are worse for maths and physics than for
chemistry, according to the latest figures.

    This year, for example, fewer than 200 people enrolled for a PGCE in
physics. The result is that many state schools do not have specialist teachers
in the core sciences. That can have an effect on the subjects that young people
choose to study at university, because they have not been fired up by an expert
and committed teacher. It is a vicious circle: fewer and fewer graduates go into
teaching, which means that there are fewer specialists to teach in the school
which results in fewer students wanting to study the science subjects at
university.

    "Unless you are in the private sector, it's quite possible you will be
taught physics at A-level by a biologist," says Alan Watson, a physics professor
at Leeds. "There is all the difference in the world between being taught by an
enthusiast with a degree in the subject and by someone who has a different
science background. It is one of the issues that the Government should be taking
seriously. Any successful industrial country requires people who are taught well
in the sciences. This is the most serious crisis the Government has in the long
term."

    The decline in admissions to chemistry is linked to the jobs market in
another respect. Apart from pharmaceuticals, the chemical industry does not have
good job prospects, according to Mark Weller, professor of chemistry at
Southampton University. During the last decade the chemical giants such as BP,
Shell and ICI have stopped funding research. And the word has got out. But more
jobs are coming on stream, because increasingly, venture capital companies are
recruiting chemistry graduates. These companies take on small numbers of
graduates at a time, compared with the thousands employed by the giants, but
altogether they may end up hiring the same number of people in total. So
eventually, job prospects may improve.

    Other higher education experts argue that the decline in traditional
subjects is only to be expected, given the new subjects which have arrived on
the scene. Students who are strong in science might prefer to take environmental
or computer science. More students are taking combined subjects, says Rick
Trainor, Vice-chancellor of Greenwich University, and that trend towards a
broader higher education will continue.

    "It's possible that people who in the past were going in to physics and
chemistry are now going into computing or psychology," he says. "You would be
very hard-pressed nowadays to find a subject association that is not re
-assessing itself."

    New developments are taking place all the time. Greenwich - together with
the University of East London - is putting in a bid for one of the new two-year
foundation degrees and has chosen, appropriately enough, to offer it in the
creative industries. Multimedia technology will be combined with landscape
design and entrepreneurship, and possibly e-business, to entice local people
into higher education.

    Another university, Southampton, is launching programmes at its New College
for lifelong learning which will offer degrees in sports management and
leadership, and political communication and media management. It is an attempt
by an old university to cash in on the new interest in vocational subjects, but
in a way that maintains Southampton's excellence in research.

    And it should probably be seen as an example of enlightened self-interest.
"The University of Southampton is the first elite university in the country to
develop this kind of initiative," says Sir Howard Newby, its Vice- chancellor.
"Following the implications of the Laura Spence affair, I'm sure we will be
followed by many others."

    It is the kind of development that may have the chemistry and physics
professors crying into their tea as they watch the core subjects contract and
physics departments close. The contraction looks inevitable. The question is
whether anything can be done to halt it - and whether it really does matter.

    l.hodges@independent.co.uk

GRAPHIC: The Human Genome project has produced the first complete map of our;
DNA, but will we have the chemists to take the work further? Matthew Fearn

LOAD-DATE: October 19, 2000


                             884 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                           October 17, 2000, Tuesday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 166 words

HEADLINE: THE INVESTMENT COLUMN: OXFORD BIOMEDICA

BYLINE: Edited By Chris Hughes

BODY:


    GENE THERAPY - stimulating genes to produce proteins - is radical stuff, and
shares in Oxford BioMedica, the UK's leader in the field, have had a rocky time
since our tip back in February at 78.5p.

    One problem is that the regulations surrounding gene therapy are
particularly stringent. Hence a 10 per cent increase in Oxford BioMedica's
shares yesterday after the group said trials for TroVax, a cancer vaccine, had
won ethical approval from the UK gene therapy authorities. Trials could start
later this year.

    TroVax makes it easier for the body to spot a protein found on the surface
of cancer cells. While a commercial product is many years away, the effect of
the trials' approval on the share price is a reminder of the stock's propensity
to respond dramatically to good news. With Oxford BioMedica pursuing 11 other
projects, the potential for further newsflow is undiminished. Shareholders
should look to add the shares, up 6.5p at 73p yesterday, to their portfolios.

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2000


                             894 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                          September 21, 2000, Thursday

SECTION: COMMENT; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 700 words

HEADLINE: THURSDAY BOOK: WISHFUL THINKING FROM A NATURAL BORN WORRIER

BYLINE: Sean O'Grady

BODY:


    The Future of Politics

    by Charles Kennedy

    (HarperCollins, pounds 17.99)

    CHARLES KENNEDY has produced a thoughtful book. No doubt it is meant to act
as a retort to those still content to see him as "Chat Show Charlie", the
politically lightweight star of Celebrity Countdown, Through the Keyhole and
other gems of daytime television.

    It is refreshing to see a political leader taking the time to write about
what Tony Benn used to call "the ishoos", rather than using the publishing trade
to carry on vicious feuds (as most of the Cabinet seem to). It is also a
pleasant novelty to see a politician volunteering mistakes, as Kennedy does when
he confesses his regrets about not wanting his party to debate the legalisation
of cannabis and other drugs. The bravery with which he has now spoken up about
something that, as he says, has touched almost every family in the country
deserves praise. Kennedy is similarly heroic in owning up to the way that, when
it comes to "legislating in the labs", most MPs appear hopelessly out of their
depth dealing with such ethically loaded issues as gene therapy and cloning.

    All that said, however, The Future of Politics does still fall into a
certain tradition of ephemeral books about politics written by serving
politicians, few of which have had lasting impact. The title recalls, perhaps
self -consciously, two of the very rare exceptions: Anthony Crosland's The
Future of Socialism (1956), the revisionist treatise that provided the nearest
thing the Labour Party had to a modern, coherent intellectual framework; and Jo
Grimond's The Liberal Future (1959), which helped to launch the Liberals' first
postwar revival.

    But most such books weren't worth the bother. Who remembers Harold Wilson's
Purpose in Politics (1964) - a title that acquired a mocking quality after a few
years of his vacillation? And as for The Blair Revolution (1996) by Peter
Mandelson and Roger Liddle (a former Lib Dem), with its eerily premonitory
subtitle "Can New Labour Deliver?", who would want to remember that? Its authors
pointedly complained about politicians who are "only in it for themselves".

    Give or take the odd fee for after-dinner speeches to the British waste-
recycling industry, no one would suggest that Kennedy is in it for himself. He
is worried to the point of distraction about low public regard for politicians
and the depressingly low turnout for recent elections. He is also understandably
fretful about social justice, the environment and the challenge of
globalisation, and even finds time to "imagine if a Hitler or a Saddam Hussein
had the power to make clones of himself". You wonder how he sleeps at night.

    Kennedy is much longer on questions than answers. Or rather, he finds it
easier to say what needs to be done than how: "let's get some brains together
and think creatively about ways in which we can foster a civic society"; "we
need a totally joined-up approach to the environment"; and "citizens must start
safeguarding each other's rights and freedoms." Well, yes. But how?

    Much of the answer, despite his protestations, is good old-fashioned
tax'n'spend. There is a great deal of enthusiasm for fuel taxes, for example.
For the rest, Kennedy seems too reliant on the kind of administrative gimmickry
that has rarely made much impact: a social justice audit for government bills; a
race tsar; a pensioners' tsar and so on. Yet he asserts that "any government
that cares about innovation has to strip bureaucracy and jargon to the minimum."

    He does much better when he explores experiments that are interesting, if
all too rare, examples of communities "empowering themselves": local credit
unions to fend off loan sharks, and even local exchange and trading systems
(Lets) - now the Liberal Democrats' favourite conversational narcotic for the
unwary. There is much that is stimulating in this book,but, just occasionally,
it reminds one of an old jibe Harold Macmillan aimed at his opponents: "As
usual, the Liberals have offered a mixture of sound and original ideas.
Unfortunately, none of the sound ideas is original and none of the original
ideas is sound." But at least Charles Kennedy tried.

LOAD-DATE: September 21, 2000


                             897 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                          September 6, 2000, Wednesday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 1, 2

LENGTH: 2990 words

HEADLINE: PROFILE: DR CHRIS EVANS - DR STRANGEBUG;
 HE HAS BACTERIA NAMED AFTER HIM, HIS SERIES OF COMPANIES DIVIDE AND MULTIPLY AT
INCREDIBLE SPEED AND HE IS WORTH POUNDS 120M. MEET DR CHRIS EVANS, BIOTECH'S
FASTEST-GROWING SUCCESS

BODY:


    The picture of the bug framed and mounted on the loo wall celebrates that
moment when Dr Chris Evans put his mark on the world. It may have been a small
step for mankind, but it was big news in the world of bacteria, and a bigger
landmark in the career of the young scientist. After all, not everyone gets to
have a bug named after them, and he discovered, identified and named the
bacteria Corynebacterium equi evansii, or Evansey as both it and he are
affectionately known in their respective circles of science.

    Dr Evans went to great lengths to get that bacteria, but some credit for
trust and olfactory bravery should go to the technician he dangled into a dark,
reeking sewer in Toronto to scrape samples of Evansey off the walls. But Dr
Evans always goes to great lengths to achieve what he wants through a mix of
conviction, dynamism and hard graft.

    His hobby is his work, and work is his hobby. He has acquired a few material
trappings with his wealth, a dozen or so Ferraris, Astons, Lotuses and Mercs,
and the 200-acre estate in his Welsh homeland, but biotechnology dominates his
life, punctuated by occasional fly-fishing or a strum or two on the electric
guitar.

    Some men devote their days to growing prize leeks, others cultivating
dahlias to exhibit, but Dr Evans grows biotech companies, lots of them, in a
technological hothouse where they are nurtured with tender loving care,
sprinkled with venture capital, and harvested for market.

    So far, he has set up 20 or so science-based companies worth more than
pounds 1.5bn, floated four on the London Stock Exchange, and made a personal
fortune estimated at more than pounds 120m. He is regarded as Europe's leading
biotech entrepreneur by a distance. He is founder of Chiroscience, now worth
more than pounds 1bn, founder and chairman of Toad Plc, and director of internet
start-up Geo. Along the way, he has advised the Government on biotech issues,
picked up an OBE for services to the industry, and collected professorships in
biotechnology from five universities: Manchester, Imperial, Exeter, Liverpool,
and Bath.

    In the yo-yo world of biotech stocks, the name of 42-year-old Chris Evans is
a beacon of stability, a byword for reliability, and a blue- chip indicator of
success. If Ladbrokes were to be asked to take bets on the success and failure
of biotechs, they would lock away the book at the mere hint of his name.

    Many believe the key to his outstanding success in the white-knuckle ride of
the biotech sector is his ability to combine brilliance in science with
remarkable business acumen and superb communication skills. Not only does he
come up with the ideas, but he can make them work, and he can explain it to the
people who still think genes are blue denim trousers made by Levi's.

    He is as at home talking to investors and venture capitalists, as he is to
his research team and the stars of academia. On the science side, his
credentials are impeccable, a first degree in microbiology at Imperial, a PhD in
biochemistry at the University of Hull, and a research fellowship in genetics at
Michigan.

    After academia, he immersed himself in the fast-growing American biotech
industry, eventually becoming research director at Genzyme, now one of the
world's key players in the sector, but then a $ 10m company. "It is massive now,
but was small then and we were building it up," he says. "I was research
director, but in a company like that you did lots of different jobs. I was doing
deals, explaining the science to clients and investors, and it was enormous
fun."

    It was also good training, and the Genzyme experience encouraged him to go
it alone, setting up his first company, Enzymatix, in 1987. "I could have stayed
as a corporate director in one of the biotechs, but I wanted to do my own thing.
I really fancied being in control of my own strategies. I have always been
someone who had ideas so I cashed in the house and everything else and went for
it.

    "I began entirely on my own, not with a group of 20 people and venture
capital. I had nothing, just a business plan and my dreams. I found premises in
Cambridge, negotiated the rent myself, and plumbed in the sink." Plumbed in the
sink? "Actually it was a sort of still, and it was a second-hand one that cost
me pounds 50 and I had to carry it from another part of the building," he says,
with a wince, and a grin. "It weighed a ton and it took me two hours to plumb it
in. It was absolutely primitive work, nothing to do with biotech.

    "When you look back, it was a leap of faith, but I didn't think much about
it at the time, that is the extraordinary thing. I think more about it now than
I did then. As far as I was concerned at the time, I was going to do it, I
wasn't going to fail, it was impossible for me to fail. That was the way I
thought. It was just matter of degree of how well it would work with no question
of failure.

    "And, in a way, that belief is crucial, and it is also infectious. I
employed a lot of young people, 50 or so of them, who were all very quick, very
bright, all with firsts, and they were like my apostles. They liked the project
and they knew I was not only a scientist, but I was also streetwise on the
deals. I was tough too. You can be charismatic, but you have to be tough as
well, and it is that combination of self-belief and confidence that keeps people
together."

    There was also, as he points out, another ingredient in those heady,
electrically-charged days. "An element of naivety was crucial too. If you are
mature and sensible, you will worry too much and you won't do these things. That
is what separated out a lot of people in the early days.

    "Then I was totally unknown, and if I failed, the only problem was between
me and my wife. We had no kids at that time, we would have had no money, and we
would have been in shit, but other than that, there was no ego thing, no worry
about what people would say in the papers because no one would say anything.
Maybe now they would. It was a big step but I didn't see it as a big step. I do
now and when I rationalise it, it looks scary. At times I can't believe I did
that."

    After Enzymatix came a succession of other companies, including his biggest
so far, Chiroscience, which he started from scratch in 1992. There is also Toad,
worth pounds 36m, and Geo.

    Right now though, he is immersed in his latest venture, Merlin. No longer
content to grow and float companies one or two at a time, he has organised a
team who oversee a production line of biotechs. Unlike almost all other venture
operations, Merlin creates companies, rather than cherry-picks existing
operations for investment.

    "In the Merlin fund, we don't invest in companies like a typical venture
capitalist. What is unusual, unique about this first fund, is that we set out to
create companies, not to back them. Everything was built from scratch. We set
out to create nine companies in nine areas and we picked cancer, vaccines, brain
trauma, gene therapy, drug delivery, stem cells, and so on, and we formed the
companies."

    His Merlin team, hand-picked from his various companies and through
contacts, means he can spread the load. "You can't do all these things yourself
because you might fall under a bus or something. I have invested quite a few
million of my own in these companies and raised a pounds 40m Merlin fund to
invest in them.

    "Each of the nine has been established, they are growing, and they are worth
between pounds 20m and pounds 100m each at this point. The first ones will start
listing, maybe later this year or certainly next year, and there could well be
two or three listings from the Merlin stable." Names to watch out for from this
stable are ReNeuron which works in the area of brain disorders, Cyclacel in
cancer, Eurogene in cardiovascular, Vectura, drug delivery, and Microscience,
novel vaccines.

    "What is interesting is that when you create a company you put your own mark
on it and you start building it up. We invested my money then the fund's money,
but there comes a point when it has to go its own way. If the company is no
good, it just dies, but if it is good then other people will want to get
involved.

    "We have blue-chip establishment companies, including Kleinwort and Nomura,
funding some of our companies. They have come in, seen they are great companies
and put up money and brought in a lot of other people. Each of these companies
has now got momentum. It is no longer Chris Evans and Merlin and some

    academics. These are serious companies and they are all hurtling towards
flotation, or mergers."

    Merlin runs two other funds. One is an investment trust in partnership with
Finsbury, the Flint Investment Trust valued in excess of pounds 150m, which has
around 40, mostly British, biotech stocks. The third fund for which he has just
completed raising 250m euros is a bioscience fund for investment in mid-stage
European bioscience companies.

    Dr Evans says he does not get involved much in the day-to-day running of his
stable of companies in which he is either non-executive chairman or director.
Merlin's original stakes in the companies were 50 to 80 per cent, but over time
they have been diluted to 20 to 50 per cent. "The only executive position I have
is chief executive and chairman of the Merlin Empire."

    But how does a man reported to be so hands-on cope with science at arm's
length? "Everyone's strength is their weakness. It has been one of my strengths
and weaknesses to be so involved that everyone depends upon you all the time,
the shareholders, the City, and people in the company. And then when you walk
away, which you have to when you are stretched so thin, you have to say, 'Look
guys I can't keep doing all this', and in doing that you are going to let
someone down."

    Through Merlin, of which he owns around 75 per cent, Dr Evans has been able
to spread his entrepreneurship much wider. Like his hero and near- neighbour Sir
Richard Branson - "I know the guy now and he is still my hero, a guy who has
done fantastic things" - he is involved in myriad activities.

    But while Merlin is a logical evolution of his career it might also be a
reaction to his experiences in starting up his first biotech in 1987, when the
closest things to business angels were bankers who didn't foreclose. "Being a
young scientist, then under 30, you weren't too credible in the eyes of the
City," he says. "The attitude of venture capitalists then was that if you
weren't grey and didn't have a track record of managing a business, forget it.
Of course I had no track record, that was my first business. It was a Catch-22.

    "Now, it is different. They can get into bed with people like Merlin. You
don't have to plumb-in your own sink anymore, you can hit the ground running.
With a good idea, a good plan you should be able to get on with it without re
-mortgaging your house. That is old-fashioned now, but I did all that, I had no
choice." Despite his personal wealth, conservatively estimated at pounds 120m,
he has not been tempted for one moment to live abroad. "I have hacked it here,"
he says, with justifiable pride. "I want to bring my four kids up here and this
is where I want to stay forever."

    Although he spends more time at his home in London than his estate backing
onto the Sugar Loaf Mountain in Abergavenny, his heart remains in Wales. The
days when Wales play rugby are ring-fenced in his diary. No board meeting can
compete with match day, and stories abound of how those wanting to strike deals
on such days have had to travel to Cardiff to see him and end up negotiating
over the Guinness.

    Although Dr Evans refuses to move abroad to escape tax, he does have a
grouse. "This is not a personal or selfish thing, but you have to allow people
to make real capital gain in this country otherwise they will use their
resources to hide it offshore or live offshore.

    "It is unfair, stupid, to have entrepreneurs who can create many millions of
pounds and make them give 40 per cent to the Treasury when all people like me
want to do is to reinvest the money we make. We are pathological investors - I
am always re-investing. And since we usually invest successfully, we create
jobs. If I had not made significant capital gains I wouldn't have been able to
create those companies, and I wouldn't have created the jobs, and there are
probably 2,000 jobs in my various companies.

    "It also creates wealth. The whole group of my companies, about 20 of them
now, are worth much more than pounds 1.5bn, and it all comes from investment.
Paying tax means you haven't got that money to invest." As a member of the Prime
Minister's Council for Science and Technology, his passion on taxes, has, no
doubt, been noticed, but his greatest love affair remains biotechs.

    "Fantastic things are happening. This is a major industry, and it is not
going to go away. When the history books come to be written, the role of the
biotech companies will be huge." For Chris Evans, who is likely to be listed
under I for icon when that history of the biotech industry is written, his
immediate future is crystal -clear. "My aim is to simply focus on Merlin 100 per
cent for the next 12 months. I want to keep building Merlin so we can become a
global force in biotech. We will be at the cutting edge in all sorts of things,
stem cells, gene therapy, and I want to see if I can get it north of a billion
dollars."

    Few, least of all Ladbrokes, are likely to offer good odds against him
achieving that, but where he will go after that is anyone's guess.

    But he will be doing something, somewhere, because one thing he has in
common with Evansey in that Toronto sewer, is that given the right conditions,
they both divide and multiply with enormous speed.

GRAPHIC: Dr Evans wants his venture capital firm Merlin to be a global force;
Geraint Lewis

LOAD-DATE: September 6, 2000


                             903 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                           August 16, 2000, Wednesday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 222 words

HEADLINE: OXFORD BIOMEDICA UP ON GENE DISCOVERIES

BYLINE: Chris Hughes

BODY:


    SHARES IN Oxford BioMedica soared 19 per cent after the gene therapy firm
said it had discovered 23 genes implicated in heart disease, cancer and
arthritis, on which it was filing patents.

    The group, which has brought forward its half-year results to this morning,
said it had also found links between the diseases and some genes already
discovered. Oxford BioMedica made the discoveries using its Smartomics
technology. The company last week raised pounds 8.5m to develop the technology
and set up a gene discovery division. Professor Alan Kingsman, chief executive,
said: "It's like doing an internet search when you have enough information to be
smart about it."

    The group is looking to derive revenue from the discoveries both by
licensing the information to genomics groups and deriving pharmaceutical
products from them. It already has drug target deals with Aventis and
AstraZeneca.

    The shares yesterday closed up 14p at 89.5p, having earlier touched 102p,
valuing the group at pounds 140m. The group plans to move from AIM to a main
listing early next year.

    The company also develops its own drugs. One product, MetXia, is in clinical
trials for breast and ovarian cancer. A second product - TroVax - is expected to
enter clinical trials for colorectal cancer by December.

    Business Review, page 3

LOAD-DATE: August 16, 2000


                             904 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                           August 16, 2000, Wednesday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1850 words

HEADLINE: CORPORATE PROFILE: OXFORD BIOMEDICA - INSIDE THE DREAM FACTORY

BYLINE: Roger Dobson

BODY:


    Professors Alan and Susan Kingsman left the labs of academia to pursue their
goal of developing a vaccine to fight and prevent cancer. Now, with with a team
of graduates and 26 PhDs, they are ready to begin human trials that could turn
Oxford BioMedica into the giant of biotech companies.
  Imagine a vaccine that works against cancer. Suppose that just one jab with
this vaccine would not only zap any cancerous tumours around, but could
eventually prevent them from forming elsewhere. Professor Alan Kingsman and his
team not only dared to imagine such a bold concept, they have made it work, at
least in animals, and now they are ready to hold human clinical trials.

    The vaccination is one of the jewels in the crown of Oxford BioMedica, a
five -year- old biotech company spun out of Oxford university by two of its
leading and most successful scientists, Professor Kingsman, now CEO and his
professor wife Susan, as research director.

    For 17 years the couple had run one of the largest molecular biology groups
at Oxford, and swapping the ivory towers of academia for commerce was more of an
evolution than a revolution for the couple. Physically, it may have meant a move
across town, but the work remained much the same, though more focused on the end
game, taking products to market.

    "While we were working in the lab, we had had a lot to do with the biotech
industry," says Professor Kingsman. "We worked for many years with Glaxo,
Amersham and so on, and so we had built up a lot of exposure to industry and
intellectual property management.

    "Over the years we also transferred a lot of technology to other companies,
but then around 1995 we had assembled a number of patents that were very
exciting for gene therapy and which affected issues that were holding the field
up. We had two choices, we could license it to others as we had done before, or
we could do it ourselves. It seemed a rather exciting opportunity so we decided
to do it ourselves."

    He and his wife set up Oxford BioMedica, armed with six patents from their
work in the university lab. The university agreed to assign them the patents in
return for an equity stake in the company worth 6 per cent. "We moved over with
just a couple of people," says the professor. "We took the view that we needed a
different sort of person. Universities are very good at basic research, but we
also wanted to develop products and we needed a slightly different kind of
person."

    At the last count, the staff of 50 at its base on the Oxford Science Park
included 41 graduates and 26 PhDs. There are about 20 other staff, who are out
-workers in various labs around the world. The company was formally set up in
1996, went onto AIM in December 1996 with a capitalisation of pounds 50m, and by
January the following year was fully functioning in the field of gene therapy
products, where it has focussed on treatments for cancer, as well as AIDS and
neuro -degenerative diseases.

    Gene therapy is seen by many as the medicine of the future. Genes are the
masterplan for life carrying the coded instructions for each individual. Using
the genes to treat the disease is seen as the way forward in medicine.

    With very few exceptions, every cell in the body has a set of around 100,000
genes packed into 46 chromosomes, half inherited maternally and half from the
father. These genes are the blueprint for manufacturing proteins that make the
cells which are the basic building blocks of the body. Problems can be
inherited, such as cystic fibrosis, and in other diseases, including many
cancers, several genes are thought to be involved in tandem with environmental
triggers, including smoking with lung cancer, diet and colon cancer, and the sun
and skin cancers.

    Researchers are also reporting increasing evidence that behaviour also has
genetic links. So far, shyness, IQ, extroversion, creativity, bullying,
depression, obesity, alcoholism, criminality, and a vulnerability to stress,
have all been linked to genes.

    Gene therapy was thought of primarily as a way of treating inherited
disorders, but the market for that technology is small. The biggest area of gene
therapy, and the sector in which Oxford Biomedica is deeply involved, is the
process of genetically triggering the patient's cells to make their own
medicine.

    Having accepted that gene therapy is the way forward, the first hurdle which
had to be surmounted was how to actually penetrate cells to get at the genetic
material.

    The answer turned out to be simple. The one thing that gets into cells
rapidly is a virus. The common cold virus, for example, works by invading the
cells of the body, dumping its genes into those cells and turning them into mini
-factories churning out more and more of its virus.

    What gene therapy scientists have done is the Trojan Horse approach. They
take a virus cell, remove its own genetic material, making it harmless, and
replace it with the therapeutic gene. In this way, the virus is used as a
vehicle to invade the cells of the body, but instead of depositing its own
harmful genetic material releases its therapeutic agents.

    Oxford BioMedica's two lead products show two ways gene therapy can be used.
MetXia-P450, which is already in human clinical trials in patients with breast
cancer, works by converting an existing tumour into an anti- cancer drug
factory. It used a virus to take in a gene that carries the genetic instructions
for cells in the tumour to activate an anti-cancer drug.

    The second lead product is Trovax, a gene-based cancer vaccine. Professor
Kingsman says: "There is a debate that we develop tumours throughout our lives
but the immune system clears them up, and only when the immune system, for
whatever reason fails to do that, we end up going to the GP with a lump or
whatever. What you then need is to wake the immune system and that's what our
vaccine is designed to do."

    The group is unlikely to be able to file a product with drugs regulators
before 2007. The vaccine works on the basis that the cells of cancer tumours
have different proteins on their surfaces which single them out from normal,
healthy tissue. It uses a pox virus containing a gene that has the instructions
for the producing those proteins. By exposing it to the virus-delivered gene,
the immune system is taught to recognise cancer cells as an enemy and destroy
the tumour.

    "You would then have killer cells and antibodies cruising around the body
looking for cells carrying this protein," says the professor. "We are very
excited about it and it has worked stunningly well in lots of work we have done
on animal models. We are now going through the regulatory approval process and
we hope to be in human trials by the end of the year."

    Initially, the treatment will be tried on patients who have cancer to see if
it can prevent spread of the disease to other areas of the body. "This will be
the first therapeutic vaccine of this type, and we have a strong intellectual
property position on it. If it proved to be very safe one could imagine a time
when we had a preventive vaccine, but that is some time off." Once the vaccine
is in clinical trials, he says the company will look at an official Stock
Exchange listing, possibly next year.

    "We are still on AIM but we're hoping to move early next year and the key to
that is that we need to get our second product in clinical trials. When that
happens, I imagine moving to the official list in the first quarter of next year
subject to market conditions." Professor Kingsman, who, like his wife, has 5.5
per cent of the equity, which makes both millionaires.

    As well as pushing ahead with the development of a range of gene therapy
products, the company also works with major pharmaceutical partners on joint
product development. Last week it also completed a fund-raising project among
major institutions to raise pounds 8.5m for a gene discovery division. Using
their own technology, the company will be trying to discover new genes involved
in diseases.

    For Professor Kingsman, it's another challenge, but one he is looking
forward to, just like the move from academia. "I have never regretted moving for
one second," he says. "It is fascinating, absorbing and very exciting work. We
do first-class science here and some of it is stunning.

    "Running an organisation, and making exciting discoveries that are going to
have a major impact on people who are ill ... I love it. Stepping down from the
ivory tower to commercial work was relatively easy for me. We used to run our
university lab on the American lines, performance-related, and goal-oriented.

    "We weren't coasting, we used to drive the group very hard and we were
successful and known throughout the world. When we set up the company we just
changed the focus. We have never made a distinction between work and non-work,
and I am available 24 hours a day, seven days a week. That's the way I function
and the way I have always functioned." He is also confident that in a decade,
Oxford Biomedica will be there, at the forefront of gene therapy.

    "In 10 years, I hope we are still be a research-based company, but we should
be well and truly in profit by then, and running the world's top tier gene
-therapy, gene-discovery, gene-manipulation company," says Professor Kingsman.
"I don't think that we will grow into a pharmaceutical-size company but I would
envisage at that time that our market capitalisation will run into billions of
pounds."

    FACT FILE

    Market capitalisation: pounds 130m

    Turnover: pounds 400,000

    Pre-tax losses: pounds 4.2m in 1990

    Business: Specialises in developing gene-based therapies in three areas. It
designs products that use genes to treat diseases such as cancer and Aids, and
it uses genes aimed at giving the immune system a nudge so the body treats
itself. In its third area, it uses gene-delivery technology to discover new
genes

    Key Executives: CEO Professor Alan Kingsman; finance director Andrew Wood;
commercial director, Dr Paul Durrands; research director Professor Susan
Kingsman; and business development director, Dr

    Neill MacKenzie

    Employees: 50 in Oxford, plus 20 supported workers in other laboratories
around the world

    FROM THE LABORATORY TO THE STOCK MARKET

    1995/6: Oxford BioMedica founded by Professor Alan Kingsman and his

    professor wife Susan, left, of Oxford university

    December 1996: Goes to AIM with market capitalisation of pounds 50m

    March 1998: Second round of funding raises pounds 6m

    1999: Rights issue generates pounds 3.2m. Institutional placing of 13.7m
shares

    produces an additional pounds 5m

    February 2000: Drug discovery unit established

    March 2000: Deal signed with Nycomed Amersham over tumour-imaging technology

    May 2000: Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston University and Diana-
Farber Cancer Institute take 500,000 shares in the company

    August 2000: pounds 8.5m raised from institutions with the issue of 14.6
million new ordinary shares. The money is targeted at setting up a new gene
-discovery division

LOAD-DATE: August 16, 2000


                             906 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            August 11, 2000, Friday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 249 words

HEADLINE: OXFORD BIO TO SEEK POUNDS 30M AT FULL LISTING

BYLINE: Chris Hughes

BODY:


    OXFORD BIOMEDICA, the gene therapy company, is looking to raise pounds 30m
when it moves from the Alternative Investment Market to take a full listing
early next year.

    The group said yesterday it had raised pounds 8.5m in a share placing to
fund a new gene discovery division which will adapt its gene therapy technology
to identify genes actively involved in disease mechanisms. Oxford placed 14.6
million shares at 60p with institutional investors.

    However, the group said that it was constrained by the market's scepticism
towards biotechnology. Andrew Wood, finance director, said: "It's been an
appalling time to raise money. I'd like to have got pounds 30m in the bank, but
life isn't as simple as that."

    Mr Wood said Oxford BioMedica would look to raise pounds 30m, equivalent to
three years' working capital, when it takes a full listing in the first quarter
of next year. The company needs to have two products in clinical trials to
qualify for a full listing and so depends on its drug Trovax joining another
cancer vaccine, MetXia, which is already in trials.

    The company's new gene division will lift the group's cash burn from pounds
4.5m to around pounds 7.5m a year.

    Oxford BioMedica uses discoveries from the mapping of the human genome to
develop proteins that are injected into the body to stimulate genes to perform
particular functions. These include genes that kill tumours and those that stop
the replication of HIV, the virus that causes AIDS.

LOAD-DATE: August 11, 2000


                             907 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            August 11, 2000, Friday

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 1682 words

HEADLINE: SCIENCE: THE MIRACLE CURE WITH A CATCH;
 SCIENTISTS COULD BE USING A NEW TECHNIQUE TO TREAT DISEASES OF THE HEART,
LIVER, BRAIN, KIDNEYS... THE LIST IS ENDLESS. SO WHAT'S STOPPING THEM? IT
INVOLVES THE CONTROVERSIAL ISSUE OF CLONING.

BYLINE: Steve Connor

BODY:


    Bridget Connors was born with no immune system and was destined to spend a
miserably short life in a sterile bubble. Today, at eight months of age, Bridget
is a healthy baby leading a near-normal life. She is living testament to the
power of stem cells, the elusive "mother cells" of the body that possess the
almost supernatural ability to mend what would otherwise be irreparably damaged
tissues and organs.

    Bridget was once given just 12 months to live. Lacking an immune system
meant she was vulnerable to just about every infection imaginable. However, at
four months of age she was given a pioneering transplant of blood cells
extracted, and then frozen, from the umbilical cord of a newborn child who had
died two years previously. Today, those transplanted blood cells have restored a
working immune system in Bridget's small body.

    The success of the operation, carried out by Andrew Cant, a consultant
paediatrician at Newcastle-upon-Tyne General Hospital, relied on the presence of
stem cells within the cord blood. These stem cells were able to replicate
continuously, shedding "daughter" cells that could develop into the specialised
white bloods cells which form a major part of our immune defences. The
transplant led to the stem cells repopulating Bridget's defective bone marrow,
enabling her to produce the cells that help to fend off infections.

    Bridget was lucky. It was pure chance that her tissue type matched that of
the child who had donated the umbilical cord blood. Mr Cant says the odds of
such a match between unrelated individuals is something like one in 18,000. For
the other Bridgets who suffer from severe combined immune deficiency, the only
viable treatment at present is either bone marrow transplantion, which again
needs a matched donor, or gene therapy, which is neither simple nor proven.

    There is another possible solution, however, which could soon be available
if the Government agrees to a change in the law governing the use of human
embryos for research. This involves taking stem cells at an even earlier stage
of development - from an embryo a few days old - and using them directly to
restore the function not only of defective bone marrow, but other diseased
tissues.

    It is generally accepted that the earlier in human development stem cells
are taken, the greater the chance of them being able to develop into a wider set
of tissues. A stem cell taken from the umbilical cord blood of a newborn can
easily be made to generate specialised blood cells, but not brain or heart
tissue. Yet a stem cell taken from an early embryo just a few days old could
theoretically develop into any of the 200 to 300 specialised cells and tissues
of the human body.

    The potential for using embryonic stem cells to treat previously incurable
conditions is vast. Harold Varmus, the former director of America's National
Institutes of Health, recently told the US Congress: "There is almost no realm
of medicine that might not be touched by this innovation."

    If it were possible to create an unlimited source of embryonic stem cells,
many of the problems associated with the shortage of organs for transplants may
be overcome. Britain's Royal Society, our de facto national academy of sciences,
has told the Government's inquiry into the issue: "Organs damaged by trauma or
disease do not always need replacing, and repair often would be possible if a
suitable source of cells was available. Stem cells are a potential source.
Patients suffering from certain degenerative diseases of the brain, liver
(hepatitis), pancreas (diabetes), blood (leukaemias), joints (rheumatoid
arthritis), heart and kidneys are likely to benefit from stem cell therapy.
Other diseases which might be alleviated thus include muscular dystrophy and
cystic fibrosis."

    As the law stands, scientists can only work with stem cells taken from an
embryo less than 14 days old if the research is geared towards understanding
fertility, reproduction or congenital disorders. Austin Smith, the only
scientist in Britain with such a licence, says that the law should be relaxed to
allow people like him to use them for treating other medical disorders. "They
are a wonderful natural resource as they can develop into almost any kind of
human cell, such as brain, bone or heart. They offer a unique opportunity to
replace tissues damaged by disease," Dr Smith says.

    So what's the problem? Why doesn't the Government change the law to allow
scientists to exploit the obvious benefits of embryonic stem cells? The answer
of course is that some religious groups perceive even the earliest embryo as a
potential human being that cannot be treated as an expendable resource. But
there is another ethical issue mixed up with the Government's deliberations.
This concerns whether permission should be given to scientists to attempt a form
of human cloning for therapeutic, as opposed to reproductive, purposes.

    Bridget Connors, like all other patients who undergo transplant operations,
faced the problem of tissue rejection. Bridget was one of the lucky ones who was
able to find a precise tissue match. Many others are not so fortunate. If,
however, it is possible to create a source of embryonic stem cells from their
own bodies - which would constitute an exact tissue match - the problems of
rejection would be no more.

    Therapeutic cloning envisages that it should be possible to take a healthy
cell from a patient in need of a transplant, extract the nucleus and transfer it
to an unfertilised egg which has had its own nucleus removed. Using the cloning
technology developed to create Dolly the sheep, it would then be possible to
stimulate the division of this unfertilised egg, complete with its own mature
nucleus, to create an early "embryo". In fact, the embryo at this stage is
technically called a morula and consists of a solid, microscopic ball of
undifferentiated cells, only some of which will eventually develop into the
embryo proper.

    After several cell divisions, the morula develops into a blastocyst, or
hollow ball of cells. It is at this stage that embryonic stem cells can be
extracted from what is called the "inner cell mass". Eventually, from day 14
onwards, this inner cell mass develops into the "primitive streak", the point at
which the embryo proper can be identified (and the point at which it is illegal
to use embryonic material for any purposes).

    What nobody yet knows is whether it is indeed possible to generate an early
embryo, or morula, from fusing an unfertilised human egg with a cell nucleus.
Experiments on animals suggest there is nothing in theory to suggest this is not
possible, but the practical problems are still enormous; the main one being the
large number of eggs needed for the creation of one animal clone.

    But the benefits of being able to create a steady source of embryonic stem
cells from one's own body tissue would be immense. It could lead to the day when
each of us has our own embryonic stem cells stored away ready for the day when
we need them. Animal studies have already shown how effective stem cells are at
incorporating themselves into complex organs such as hearts or brains and
effectively repairing any damaged tissues. Julia Polak, a stem cell researcher
at the Hammersmith Hospital in London, says: "We are beginning to see that stem
cells will grow into the right cell types when they are transported into other
tissues, for example, stem cells injected into bone will start making bone
cells."

    The Government's chief medical officer, Liam Donaldson, submitted his report
on the the use of therapeutic cloning to produce embryonic stem cells three
months ago. It has been widely touted as recommending a go- ahead, with the
strong proviso that no one be allowed to transplant any human clone into a womb.
So-called reproductive cloning, resulting in the birth of a cloned baby, will be
strictly illegal.

    Next week the Government is expected to make its decision, fully conscious
of the medical benefits that could result. But its delay in responding to the
Donaldson inquiry suggests it is equally sensitive to the ethical storm that
will inevitably follow any relaxation of the laws governing human embryo
research. Ministers may be damned if they do allow therapeutic cloning, but they
will be more damned by the vast majority of medical scientists if they don't.

    Anne McLaren, one of Britain's most eminent embryologists and principal
research associate at the Wellcome Trust and Cancer Research Campaign Institute
in Cambridge, says the critics of therepeutic cloning would be using familiar
pro-life arguments. "There would of course still be people who believe that
personhood is present from the very beginning of embryonic life, so that using
an embryo for any purpose other than making a baby is tantamount to murder," Dr
McLaren says.

    "The stroke victim, the multiple sclerosis patient and the person crippled
with rheumatoid arthritis may, on the other hand, believe that they have every
right to use what are effectively their own cells."

    COUNTDOWN TO THE GOVERNMENT'S DECISION ON THERAPEUTIC CLONING

    February 1997

    Scientists at the Roslin Institute near Edinburgh announce the birth of
Dolly the sheep, the first clone of an adult mammal.

    November 1998

    Several teams of researchers claim to be able to identify human embryonic
stem cells, the "mother cells" of the body which can develop into any one of 300
specialised tissues.

    December 1998

    A joint report by the Human Genetics Advisory Commission and the Human
Fertilisation and Embryology Authority recommends the law should allow
"therapeutic cloning" where embryonic stem cells are extracted from cloned
embryos for medical research.

    August 1999

    Government sets up an advisory group on therapeutic cloning under Liam
Donaldson, chief medical officer.

    May 2000

    Donaldson's leaked recommendation that therapeutic cloning for stem- cell
research be allowed.

    August 2000

    Government decides if therapeutic cloning of human embryos is to be made
legal.

GRAPHIC: Bridget Connors recovers in hospital after pioneering stem-cell
treatment saved her life

LOAD-DATE: August 11, 2000


                             919 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                             June 27, 2000, Tuesday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 622 words

HEADLINE: THE GENOME PROJECT: WE NOW HAVE KEY TO UNLOCK THE CAUSES OF CANCER;
  TREATMENTS

BYLINE: Steve Connor

BODY:


    CANCER IS one disease that has already undergone a minor revolution in the
dawn of the new genetics.

    David Weatherall, regius professor of medicine at Oxford University, said
that 20 years ago cancer was a total mystery. "It was like an act of God. But
human genetics has led to a genuine understanding of how cancers are generated,"
he said.

    There are about 200 different cancers and each is the result of one of the
hundred, million million cells of the human body dividing uncontrollably,
leading to tumours that can spread through the bloodstream.

    Scientists now believe that it takes a number of different genes to
malfunction in order to generate the necessary genetic changes that cause a cell
to proliferate so dangerously.

    Professor Mike Stratton, head of the Wellcome Trust's Cancer Genome Project,
said: "The basic hard-wiring of a cancer is in the DNA. For that reason cancer
is the pre-eminent disease of DNA; it's the pre-eminent disease of genomes."

    Defects in anywhere between 5 and 20 genes are thought to be needed to
trigger a cancer and about 100 genes are currently implicated in the disease
that strikes down more than one in three people. Professor Stratton said that as
many as 1,000 genes may eventually be shown to play a cancerous role.

    "Finding the genes, and finding the abnormalities of genes, can sometimes
give you an indication of the causes of cancer," Professor Stratton said. "We
hope to get greater insight into their environmental causes.

    "Most importantly, these genes are the appropriate targets for modern
therapeutics. If you find the genes that are abnormal and you can target them,
then you can hope to revert cancer cells to something more like normality," he
said.

    "There are now drugs emerging that are directed at abnormal proteins encoded
by abnormal genes and some of these drugs are proving remarkably effective at
treating cancers, more effective than any of us in our wildest dreams could have
expected.

    "It would surprise me enormously if in 20 years' time the treatment of
cancer has not been transformed. We will owe it to the springboard provided by
the Human Genome Project."

    THREE OTHER ILLNESSES THAT COULD BE DEFEATED

    Muscular dystrophy

    Because the dystrophin gene is very large, it is unlikely that scientists
will be able to use gene therapy to introduce it to all affected muscle cells,
says Professor Kay Davies, of Oxford University. As a result of the new
genetics, she has found a relative of the dystrophin gene, called utrophin, that
is smaller but plays a similar function. The team is now looking at ways of
either introducing extra copies of the utrophin gene into patients or boosting
the gene they already have.

    Cystic fibrosis This is the most common inherited disorder of white
Europeans that is caused by a defect in a single gene. One effect is to alter
the fluid balance in the lungs, causing the build-up of heavy mucus that hinders
breathing. By identifying the gene's function, scientists hope to be able to
design better treatments. Researchers are also working on gene therapy, using
viruses or other "vectors" to introduce healthy versions of the gene into the
cells lining the respiratory tract.

    Heart disease Geneticists hope the genome will shed light on the genes that
lead to early heart disease. Already doctors advise people with relatives who
have died of heart disease to take regular exercise and avoid fatty foods. But
scientists now believe that a knowledge of the smallest genetic differences
between people will enable them to advise young people on whether they have a
high risk of heart disease and other disorders where many genes combine to give
a risk of premature death.

LOAD-DATE: June 27, 2000


                             920 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                             June 27, 2000, Tuesday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 559 words

HEADLINE: THE GENOME PROJECT: DISCOVERIES BRING IN AGE OF DESIGNER MEDICINES;
  HEALTH

BYLINE: Steve Connor, Science Editor

BODY:


    MEDICINE IN the 21st century will be revolutionised by the decoding of the
human genome - the three billion letters in the human "Book of Life".

    Knowing the full DNA sequence, the digital recipe of our genes, will enable
scientists to predict inherited predispositions to disease and to develop
tailor-made drugs.

    It opens the doors to an era of "personalised medicine", with each patient
being treated according to their unique genetic signature.

    John Sulston, the director of the Sanger Centre in Cambridge, which decoded
about one-third of the genome, said the future of medicine was genomic: "Over
the decades and centuries to come, this sequence will inform all of medicine,
all of biology, and will lead us to a total understanding of not only human
beings but all of life."

    A battery of new genetic tests for single-gene defects, such as cystic
fibrosis and muscular dystrophy, has been developed, but knowing the full genome
will accelerate that pace of discovery enormously.

    Nearly 5,000 inherited disorders are known to be caused by mutations in just
one of the 60,000 or so human genes. Many of the more common disorders, from
heart disease and cancer to Alzheimer's and Parkinson's, are known to be at
least partially determined by a genetic component.

    Being able to find the defects that turn a healthy gene into a potential
killer not only enables scientists to develop new diagnostic tests, but gives
them a handle on how to develop better treatments.

    It also opens the way to the possibility of correcting genetic defects by
gene therapy - the surgical replacement or augmentation of diseased genes with
healthy copies. Professor Tony Monaco, of the Wellcome Trust Centre for Human
Genetics at Oxford University, said the full genome sequence will enable "gene
hunters" to find a new one in a year instead of the three or four years it took
in the past.

    "This has enormous significance for biology and disease research since we
previously only knew a fraction of the genes and now we will know all the
players. Future research will be to understand how they all function and
interact in the cells that make up our body," Professor Monaco said.

    Everyone's DNA sequence is 99.99 per cent identical, but it is the
differences that become important in knowing why some become ill, some cannot
take certain drugs and some die prematurely.

    Part of the genome project is to identify the smallest mutations that
distinguish one person from another, so-called single nucleotide polymorphisms
or SNPs, pronounced "snips". Scientists describe SNPs as the most detailed
genetic "signposts" that can predict a patient's future susceptibility to
disease.

    David Bentley, the head of human genetics at the Sanger Centre, said a
single SNP difference can determine if a person has high cholesterol levels in
their blood, which can lead to a significant difference in the relative risks of
heart disease."Knowledge of such a genetic change in advance would lead to the
prescription of a different drug or the prescription of lower dose," Dr Bentley
said.

    Michael Morgan, the chief executive of the Wellcome Trust's Genome Campus in
Cambridge, said that comparing a patient's genomic differences with the human
genome "gold standard" would enable doctors of the future to treat patients as
real individuals.

GRAPHIC: Lord Sainsbury at the announcement by The Human Genome Project at the
Wellcome Trust in London David Sandison

LOAD-DATE: June 27, 2000


                             935 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            June 15, 2000, Thursday

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 444 words

HEADLINE: A QUESTION OF HEALTH

BYLINE: Dr Fred Kavalier

BODY:


    Our four-month-old baby is not putting on enough weight and she is going to
have a test to look for cystic fibrosis. Is it possible that the child of two
healthy parents could have a genetic disease like this?

    The gene that causes cystic fibrosis is carried by about 5 per cent of the
population but the vast majority are unaware that they have it. The disease only
appears when two carriers of the gene have a child who gets a "double dose" -
one copy of the faulty gene from each parent. In this way, it is possible for
two healthy parents to have a child with cystic fibrosis. Although it is a
serious disease, new treatments for children have made it much less dangerous.
And research into gene therapy may one day find a cure. For more information
contact the Cystic Fibrosis Trust (www.cftrust.org.uk).

    My sleep is being seriously disturbed by my husband's snoring. Fleeing is
not an option because we live in a one-bed flat. Are there any fool- proof ways
of stopping snoring?

    Snorers are usually blissfully unaware of the suffering they cause. Being
overweight and drinking too much alcohol are two lifestyle factors that make
snoring worse. Sedative and sleeping tablets can also cause snoring. Some
snorers have a lower jaw that slides back when they sleep, leading to a partial
obstruction of their breathing passage. There are ear, nose and throat surgeons
who specialise in snoring and related problems. A referral to a specialist
clinic may be the answer. It is, for example, possible to fit a custom-made
splint to hold the jaw forward.

    I have recently developed a red, itchy rash around the back of my neck. My
doctor thinks it could be caused by a necklace but I have worn the same gold
necklace for 10 years. Could it be an allergy to the necklace?

    Gold necklaces are less likely to cause allergic reactions than other metals
but it's quite possible your skin has become sensitised, even after 10 years.
Contact dermatitis is a type of skin inflammation caused by coming into contact
with a substance that your skin cannot tolerate. The commonest metal to cause
this is nickel, which is present in everything from watch straps to the studs on
jeans. Even high-quality gold can cause this. If it is the necklace, the rash
should disappear after a couple of weeks without wearing it. You could find an
answer to what is causing it by having patch tests to see what you are allergic
to.

    Send your questions to: A Question of Health, 'The Independent', 1 Canada
Square, Canary Wharf, London E14 5DL; fax 0171-293 2182; or e-mail: health@
independent.co.uk. Dr Kavalier regrets he is unable to reply personally to
questions

LOAD-DATE: June 15, 2000


                             936 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                             June 12, 2000, Monday

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 1, 7

LENGTH: 1841 words

HEADLINE: EASILY WORTH POUNDS 500M;
 BUDGET FLIGHTS, HIRE CARS, INTERNET CAFES AND NOW A CYBERBANK AND ONLINE
SHOPPING... STELIOS HAJI-IOANNOU'S COLOUR-CODED EMPIRE JUST GROWS AND GROWS.
IT'S NO SURPRISE: HE'S A SELF-PUBLICIST WITHOUT EQUAL. JUST DON'T ASK HIM ABOUT
HIS PRIVATE LIFE

BYLINE: Deborah Ross

BODY:


    So, off to meet Stelios Haji-Ioannou - pronounced: Ha-Gee-Ar-Noo - who
founded easyJet, the horribly orange but staggeringly successful low-cost
airline, then went on to bring us easyEverything (a fast-growing chain of
internet cafes), easyRentacar (which, basically, does what it says on the tin)
and, soon, easyMoney (an online bank), plus easyDotcom (a shopping portal).
Blimey - pronounced: Bly -Mee - is he going to orangify the entire world? Where
is all this branding going to end? With easyLay, perhaps? I hope so. I reckon I
could run that.

    Anyway, Mr Haji-Ioannou is 33, single, 44th in The Sunday Times Rich List,
with a personal fortune said to be worth pounds 500m. He's madly eligible. "How
long do you want him?" his PR asks, when we first speak on the phone. "As long
as it takes him to propose and whisk me to Tiffany's," I reply. A long pause.
"Only joking," I hastily add. "It doesn't have to be Tiffany's. I'm cheap.
Clare's Accessories? A Quality Street wrapper, smoothed out and wrapped round a
finger?" Another pause. I think I've messed up. I think I've scotched my
chances. Mr Haji-Ioannou will never see me now. "Tomorrow then," I'm told. "At
around noon?" Well, I'll be blowed.

    Actually, I shouldn't have been too surprised. Mr Haji-Ioannou is
spectacularly and unusually press friendly. An unstoppable self-publicist, even.
One week, it's Mr Haji-Ioannou buying several rows of seats for him and his
orange-clad employees on the inaugural flight of BA's low cost rival, Go. The
next it's Mr Haji-Ioannou chopping up his Barclaycard in protest at pounds 5
increase in landing fees at Luton airport, which is where easyJet is based, and
which is effectively controlled by the Barclays Group. Mr Haji-Ioannou
absolutely adores being visible. Mr Haji-Iannou loves to fly on his planes,
working the aisles, joshing with his customers. This can be irritating, I know,
but, still, can you name easyJet's competitors as easily as you can name
easyJet? Go, Virgin Express, Buzz, Ryanair? And would you know their corporate
colours? Quite. But why orange, Stelios? "Because when I started easyJet, no
other airline was using it at the time." It wasn't a marketing or branding
agency's decision, then? No, he says. He went to such an agency initially but
"pounds 60,000 later, all I had were some magazine clippings stuck on cardboard.
Hah!" He likes orange, then adds. "It's a nice, vibrant colour. It looks great
on aeroplanes."

    We meet at a London hotel where Stelios is giving a talk as part of a day
long Digital Britain 2000 summit. Stelios is mad for the internet. (Seventy per
cent of easyJet's bookings are now made on the Net, while easyRentacar only does
business on it.) "I said two years ago that the Net was only for nerds. But
luckily, I'm very adaptable. Hah!"

    Stelios is dark with black curly hair. He is quite portly, with a big face.
He looks a bit like a Mediterranean version of Norm from Cheers. He knows I will
mention his weight. "All journalists do. They don't want to write an advert, so
have to find a flaw. Hurtful? No. I'm mature enough to understand what it's
about." He is wearing an ugly, orange plastic watch, no tie - all his companies
have a "no tie" policy - and what looks like a cheap, chain-store suit.
Probably, it is. Mr Haji-Ioannou is never flashy. Mr Haji-Ioannou does not, I'm
sure, own a Birt-style wardrobe stuffed with Armani suits. And this makes
absolute sense, when you think about it. His customers come, mostly, from the
very bottom end of the market. So it wouldn't do to walk up and down, say, the
easyJet flight from London to Aberdeen - easyJet price, pounds 57.50; BA, pounds
281 - with a bloody big Rolex on his wrist, would it? It would get nicked in no
time.

    He is known, yes, as "the people's entrepreneur", founder of "the people's
airline", champion of the common man in his fight against the rip-off cartels
that for so long made air travel unaffordable for so many. Which is odd, really,
when you consider it properly. I mean, unlike Richard Branson, for example,
Stelios has never actually been one of the people. Stelios's father, Loucas
Haji-Ioannou, is the self-made Greek-Cypriot billionaire who owns Troodos
Shipping in Athens and is known as "The Tanker King". Stelios was worth zillions
- well, at least pounds 30m, it's been said - before he even started easyJet.
Stelios could have spent all his life poncing about on the Riviera. He doesn't
have to work, but does. I wonder why I'm so suspicious of this. Is it because
it's so very un-English?

    Indeed, as I tell Stelios, when English people are born into money, they
just sit about on their titled behinds until it's all gone, then open their
homes to the public and whine about the cost of roofing and gene therapy for
their inter-bred children. He says yes, but that's not his way. So what does
motivate you, Stelios? "Oh, different things at different times. When I was a
school in Greece, I wanted to go to University in London. When I was running my
father's business, I wanted to prove I could run a

    business myself, in an industry my father knew nothing about." So, it's
paternal approval. Have you won it, at least? "My father is very proud. When he
flies from Athens to London, he goes via Monaco, so he can fly easyJet!"

    He works punishingly hard. He's just flown in from a business meeting in
Lausanne. He's going to France tonight to host an easyRentacar workshop. Work
has, more or less, squeezed everything else out of his life. He doesn't have
time to read, I later discover. Or go to the cinema. Or hang about at his homes
in Athens and Monaco. Or play on his yacht (discreetly moored in Monaco). What
about time for relationships? Are you dating, Stelios? "I'd rather not talk
about that. It's of no interest to the public." But, Stelios, you must see that
the more you put yourself about in your big, jolly, orange, friendly way, the
more people are going to want to know.

    "I am trying very hard to keep my private life out of the newspapers. I have
an interesting public life, but not such an interesting private life. All I can
say is that Princess Stephanie is not my girlfriend." The thing about Stelios,
it occurs to me now, is that he will only ever give away what's good for
business. First and foremost, he is - and I think this is often easilyForgotten
- a spectacularly sharp operator. He may be the world's most invisible, visible
man, if you get what I mean.

    We have our conference lunch. Trendy, Tony Blair fish and chips with the
mushy peas in ramekins and the chips stacked artfully, Jenga-style. Stelios does
not dismantle his pile. "The weight. So I lay off the chips." He addresses the
summit, giving a brief history of easyJet which, in just five years has grown
into a phenomenal business: 28 routes across Europe, 18 planes with 32 more on
the way, 5.5 million passengers a year.

    OK, there is nothing new in budget airlines. But unlike Laker, Stelios seems
to have got it all right. Why did Laker fail? "He did long haul, and budget
flying is only a short-haul concept." And Debonair, which recently went to the
wall? "They offered business class. You can't do low-cost business class." With
easyJet, Stelios offers a no-frills deal which, actually, is something of a
shame. I look good in frills, actually. Indeed, show me a branch of Laura Ashley
and I'm in there, buying something white and high-necked and most fetchingly
ruched. No, seriously, what he did was strip away the usual, costly peripheries
- different classes of travel, ghastly food that costs a bomb, tickets and
travel agents, even. You book directly over the phone or Net, and need only take
a reference number to the airport with you. "Our relationship with travel
agents? It's simple. They hate us and we hate them." Similarly, with
easyRentacar, it's one car for one price. A Mercedes A Class for only pounds 9 a
day. See? See? I am writing an advert for him. As I've said, he's clever.

    Still, coming from the background he does, how did he come upon this market?
He says it occurred to him when, once, he was stuck in London and needed to get
to Corfu, "and I realised that a 10-day Monarch package cost as much as a BA
scheduled flight. So I bought the Monarch charter, and threw away the holiday."
But price can't prohibit you from anything, surely? "Well, Mercedes are courting
me to buy an SLR, but it's pounds 200,000 and, so far, I've been resisting. It's
too much. I drive a Smart car."

    But can you properly understand the sorts of people who won't go to the
supermarket without fistfuls of money-off coupons? "That must be one of my
skills." "One of your skills? "Yes. Not thinking of myself, and being able to
see the other point of view." That is a skill. Definitely.

    He was born in Athens. His family are ludicrously rich, yes, but never
ostentatious, he claims. "OK, we had a big house and a yacht and cars and
drivers, but we could have been much more over the top." What's your father
like? "Very clever. Intelligent. Not particularly cultured. He came from a poor
family and worked very hard all his life. He worked seven days a week. He's a
bit of a control freak. You're not allowed to order a cucumber without asking
him. He's stubborn, sometimes, but fair with me, at least." Affectionate?
"Between father and son in Greece there is not affection. But he saw my
capabilities and, from day one, treated me like an adult." Did you always feel
you had something to prove to him? "Maybe."

    He went to a private school in Athens, then to the London School of
Economics here, before returning to Greece to work in his father's business. He
worked there for two years but became very frustrated by the company's
resistance to change. He wished to go it alone. And your father, the control
freak, didn't mind? "When he realised I wouldn't be happy as a number two, he
let me go." In 1992, he launched his first business, Stelmar Tankers, then
borrowed pounds 25m from his father to start easyJet. Since then he, too, has
been working round the clock, seven days a week.

    Don't you have any hobbies, Stelios? "My businesses are my hobbies. I only
go into businesses that interest me. I like planes. I like computers. I like
cars. I don't like coal- mining." So, no easyCoalmining, at least? "No." But all
the travelling and everything. Don't you you ever get lonely? "I don't get the
time!" What's the payback? "The bloke who, on a flight to me this morning,
thanked me for saving his sex life because without easyJet, he could not have
afforded to visit his girlfriend. It's appreciation. There are plenty of ways to
just make money. I could have been an arms dealer. But I've managed to make a
business and do good for people."

    And now he has to go to his offices at Luton airport. We shake hands
goodbye. I can see, now, there will be no trip to Tiffany's. I can see, even,
that no one is ever likely to take me to Tiffany's. And you can pronounce that
whichever way you like, although tearfully usually does it.

GRAPHIC: Stelios: 'My businesses are my hobbies. I like planes'

LOAD-DATE: June 12, 2000


                             946 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            April 15, 2000, Saturday

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 47

LENGTH: 414 words

HEADLINE: TELEVISION: DRUGS, AND HOW TO GET THEM

BYLINE: James Rampton

BODY:


    The year is 2012 and Craig, a man suffering from leukaemia, is unable to
afford the prohibitively expensive new genetic therapy that has just been
developed. In desperation, he enlists the help of his wife, Louise, and Sepp, a
"radical healthcare activist", to kidnap the chief executive of a biotech
company. They plan to hold him to ransom in exchange for the exorbitantly priced
genetic therapy Craig requires.

    The abduction is broadcast live on Sepp's pirate Web TV channel, which has
hijacked the regular airwaves. "It's one thing to sit there bleating," Louise
declares passionately to the viewers, "it's quite another to change things.
Craig needs action."

    Channel 4's thought- provoking drama, Kidnap, showing in a new strand
entitled Futurecast, may be set 12 years hence, but is it really so implausible?

    "You can see strands from Kidnap in today's headlines," maintains Bryn
Higgins, the film's producer/ director. "Nothing in this drama is
unrecognisable. We've set it 12 years off, but it's likely this will happen
sooner. There's already a 'corporations versus the state' issue, and the
corporations are winning. Their power is increasing all the time - and
politicians can't do much about it. Some MPs feel that governments are bending
over backwards too much to accommodate corporate wishes. Big companies can
dictate to governments their terms for working in a country; they can simply
say, 'If you don't like it, we'll go elsewhere'.

    "Getting these corporations to have a conscience is pretty hard. They'd just
say to you, 'What does a conscience have to do with business?' Technology is
moving ahead so fast that the ethical debate is having difficulty keeping up.
Companies never halt the development of technology on ethical grounds."

    But what is the little man or woman supposed to do in the face of these
intimidating commercial forces?

    "It's about making your voice felt and trying to get corporations to behave
in a more socially responsible way," Higgins argues. "Direct action may be the
only way of doing it. Look at the demonstrations about AZT (the drug to help
people with HIV). There was so much protest about the high price that in the end
they lowered it. Through extreme action, you can get your voice heard. Even now,
with a few hundred pounds' worth of software, you can broadcast your own news on
the Net. We're practically living in the future already."

    Futurecast begins on Thur at 9pm on C4

    James Rampton

GRAPHIC: Power struggle: Craig (Gary Sefton) takes direct action to secure the
leukaemia treatment he needs

LOAD-DATE: April 17, 2000


                             947 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                             April 14, 2000, Friday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 437 words

HEADLINE: GENES RESPONSIBLE FOR MANY KILLER DISEASES IDENTIFIED BY GENOME TEAM

BYLINE: Steve Connor Science Editor

BODY:


    THREE CHAPTERS in the genetic "book of man" were published last night by
scientists who have decoded the genes on three more human chromosomes. With one
chromosome already deciphered, this breakthrough marks an important milestone in
the plan to publish the first "working draft" of the entire human genome by this
summer.

    A joint effort by some of America's most sensitive nuclear weapons
laboratories, who had the spare computing power to perform the task ahead of
schedule, meant scientists now know the DNA code of between 10,000 and 15,000
extra human genes - about 6 per cent of the total.

    The genes, on chromosome numbers 5, 16 and 19, include those implicated in
many important diseases, such as prostate and colorectal cancer, leukaemia,
high-blood pressure and atherosclerosis. The full and detailed map of all 23
pairs of chromosomes in the human genome, which is likely to be finished well
before the scheduled date of 2003, is expected to revolutionise medicine in the
21st century.

    A fully decoded human genome, encompassing a 23-chapter "book" of some three
billion "letters" will create an explosion in medical knowledge, leading to new
diagnostic tests, drugs tailor-made for individual patients and new gene
therapies that might destroy inherited disorders.

    Scientists from the three weapons laboratories at Los Alamos, Livermore, and
Berkeley in California who formed the Joint Genome Institute, said the working
draft consists of more than 95 per cent of the genes on the three chromosomes.
The final 5 per cent should be completed within three years.

    Bill Richardson, the US Secretary of Energy who announced the latest
breakthrough in Washington DC, said: "Scientists can already mine this treasure
trove of information for the advances it may bring in our basic understanding of
life as well as applications such as diagnosing, treating and eventually
preventing disease."

    All the information relating to the DNA sequences will be published and
available free to all scientists as part of the Joint Genome Institute's
collaborative agreement with the international Human Genome Project.

    Last month, the project leaders announced they had finished sequencing about
two-thirds of the 3bn DNA letters of the genetic book of man.

    Last week, scientists at the project's private rival, Celera Genomics of
Maryland, said they had finished sequencing the first working draft of the
entire genome.

    But other scientists said Celera's approach has not permitted the sequences
to be arranged in their correct order, making the information next to useless
until this is done.

GRAPHIC: 23 pairs of chromosomes make up human genome

LOAD-DATE: April 14, 2000


                             949 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                           March 22, 2000, Wednesday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 578 words

HEADLINE: BUDGET 2000: CASE STUDY - THE HI-TECH COMPANY

BODY:


    AS HEAD of one of the UK's most innovative and high-risk biotechnology
companies, Professor Alan Kingsman of Oxford BioMedica was disappointed that the
Budget's measures to help hi-tech firms will do little to help him pursue his
expensive research programme.

    Oxford BioMedica is one of a just handful of companies around the world
pioneering gene therapy, the development of vaccines which switch on genes which
can help arrest tumour growth. The technology is so new the company is unlikely
to be filing a product with medical authorities before 2007. In the meantime,
Oxford BioMedica is burning up cash in research. It posted losses of pounds 4.3m
last year.

    The company's most pressing issue is staying solvent since, as a focused
technology company, there are few revenues from licensing deals to offset the
huge costs of the R&D programme which generates big losses.

    The existing tax regime does little to help Oxford BioMedica. A percentage
of its losses generates tax credits, which can be set against the company's tax
bill when it eventually makes profits. The problem is that it could go under
before then.

    Details of the Chancellor's long-trailed tax credit for research and
development, unveiled yesterday and worth pounds 150m, were greeted by Oxford
BioMedica as an anti-climax. "I'm glad to hear it but I wish it was bigger,"
says Prof Kingsman. "To us it's worth less than a month's expenditure for us."

    Andrew Wood, the finance director, calculates the Chancellor's changes would
have been worth just pounds 270,000 to the business had they been in place last
year. "Of course any assistance is welcome, but this is now looking like a
headline-grabbing initiative," says Mr Wood. "The Chancellor has chosen to adopt
his own definition of R&D, and not the standard accounting one, which means the
rebate is much less than it should be."

    Under the Chancellor's formula for the rebate, only Oxford BioMedica's
spending on salaries and "consumable" equipment qualifies as R&D expenditure.
The costs of running a lab do not. Furthermore, the rebate replaces a future tax
credit which would be worth pounds 500,000 under existing rules. "Although the
rebate is less in absolute terms, money now is worth more to than money in the
future," says Mr Wood. Even so, since the company cannot apply for the rebate
until it files its tax return, it could be 21 months before it is received.

    However, the company welcomed the Chancellor's announcement that he would
consult hi-tech firms on the reform of the taxing of share options.

    Options are Oxford BioMedica's only financial incentive for attracting top-
drawer scientific talent. However, under current law the company is taxed on the
profit an employee makes on cashing in the options.

    Many hi-tech firms have seen this as a tax on their share price. Oxford
BioMedica calculates the liability on the options it has granted so far to be
pounds 175,000. "I can't believe the tax is still in place," says Prof Kingsman.

    Since coming to the market at the height of the biotechnology boom in 1996,
Oxford BioMedica has returned to the City three times to raise funds to continue
its research programme. The Budget is unlikely to stop it returning once more.
The alternative is to sell licences on discoveries to pharmaceutical majors at
early stages of their development, though this means the value of the product
largely leaves the company, and possible the country.

GRAPHIC: Alan Kingsman, left, and Andrew Wood of the hi-tech, high-risk; Oxford
BioMedica John Lawrence

LOAD-DATE: March 22, 2000


                             952 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                             March 17, 2000, Friday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 321 words

HEADLINE: OXFORD BIOMEDICA CHIEF SEEKS TO CALM FEARS OVER PATENTS

BYLINE: Chris Hughes

BODY:


    OXFORD BIOMEDICA, the gene therapy group, yesterday broke the UK
biotechnology sector's silence on Bill Clinton and Tony Blair's intervention in
the gene patenting debate, which has sent shares in the sector tumbling in the
last two days.

    The company issued a statement seeking to reassure shareholders that
comments on Tuesday by Mssrs Clinton and Blair that gene discoveries should not
be patented were no threat to its future.

    The statement said: "In general, discoveries cannot, and we believe should
not, be patented. However, if one takes a discovery and uses it to make a
product, the product is a patentable invention. This was clearly endorsed by
President Clinton and Tony Blair."

    In spite of the statement, Oxford BioMedica's shares closed down 7p at
84.5p.

    The company is a pioneer in the field of gene therapy. It uses discoveries
in genomics - the mapping of the human genome - to develop proteins which are
injected into the body to stimulate genes to perform particular functions. These
include genes that kill tumours and stop the replication of HIV, the virus that
causes Aids.

    Professor Alan Kingsman, Oxford BioMedica's chief executive, said: "I'm not
sure Clinton and Blair said anything too bad. It's the way it's been interpreted
that's the problem. They recognise the importance of intellectual property
rights as a spur to developing new medicines. No new medicine would be developed
without a patent to protect it."

    He said he issued the statement in response to anxious calls from confused
shareholders. "We're a gene-based company - if we weren't going to put the
record straight, who would?"

    Professor Kingsman said the company already had patents on all the genes it
needed for product development for the foreseeable future.

    He added: "Ninety per cent of the value of the UK biotechnology sector
doesn't lie in things that come out of the Human Genome Project."

LOAD-DATE: March 17, 2000


                             967 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                          February 17, 2000, Thursday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 354 words

HEADLINE: OUTLOOK: PHARMA VISION

BODY:


    THERE'S A nasty bug doing the rounds - "anti-mergeritus". Common symptoms
include a sickening plunge in the share price for all those attempting "value
enhancing" mergers, and Glaxo Wellcome in combination with SmithKline Beecham
has got it bad. Despite their blockbuster treatments for Aids, asthma and
diabetes, the UK's leading pharmaceutical giants have seen the market wipe a
fifth off their value since unveiling their merger last month.

    For a merger that both companies' shareholders were demanding for two years
- even a House of Commons committee criticised the groups for failing to clinch
the deal first time round in 1998 - this seems perverse. There are a number of
reasons why this might be happening. Vodafone AirTouch has been attracted
capital out of other FTSE 100 stocks as funds get their weighting up following
its merger with Mannesmann.

    There are also fears that frontrunners in the US presidential elections will
want to centralise US healthcare spending to give greater purchasing power over
the pharmaceutical companies. Furthermore, some US investors would rather shift
their money out of SB and on to Nasdaq than own shares in a big, relatively
low-growth, UK drugs company.

    They may be missing something. Short-term issues aside, this merger
continues to have plenty going for it. The message from both companies yesterday
was the excitement of the long-term picture - exploitation of the latest
developments in genetics to more accurately identify drug targets.

    This field, genomics, should be distinguished from its more sinister
relation, gene therapy, which aims to regenerate the body from within by
manipulating gene codes. That field hit setbacks recently after a patient died
in gene therapy trials.

    While Glaxo SmithKline's vision of using genomics to develop better pills is
less like science fiction than the promise of gene therapy, it is no less awe
-inspiring, marking a new age in drug discovery that will deliver big
improvements in the quality of life. It's early days, but Glaxo SmithKline will
be as well placed as any to exploit these developments.

LOAD-DATE: February 17, 2000


                             974 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                           February 3, 2000, Thursday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 248 words

HEADLINE: THE INVESTMENT COLUMN: OXFORD BIOMEDICA

BODY:


    CANCER TREATMENTS for dogs and cats are among the odder treatments being
developed by biotech company Oxford Biomedica.

    This may sound silly, but investors should remember the lesson from the
biotechnology sector's fall from grace last decade - biotechs need broad
portfolios.

    Oxford's own wide-ranging portfolio has helped it attract plenty of investor
attention in recent months, as the sector has come back into fashion. Even
though the company has been on a fundraising trail through the City, some
institutional investors have been buying shares in the market to get their
positions even higher. A deal last month with IDM, the French biotech group, to
develop treatments to boost the immune system by manipulating cells has kept up
the momentum.

    The group yesterday fed the story with a little more newsflow - its gene
therapy cancer treatment has delivered some positive trial data - sending the
shares up 9p, or 13 per cent to 78.5p.

    Investors should expect more newsflow. A partnership deal with a
pharmaceutical major in the gene therapy area is likely, while the veterinary
side could also bring in some fresh licensing cash this year.

    While revenues are growing steadily, they will continue to come largely from
one-off licensing deals for the next four years or so. The company will
meanwhile post a loss as it reinvests the revenues to alleviate its pounds 4m a
year cash burn. Investors who are in for the long-term will find the shares good
value.

LOAD-DATE: February 3, 2000


                             981 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            January 24, 2000, Monday

SECTION: FOREIGN NEWS; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 56 words

HEADLINE: DEATH OF PATIENT HALTS GENE TRIALS

BODY:


    THE UNIVERSITY of Pennsylvania medical centre, one of America's top research
bases, has been instructed to suspend its pioneering gene therapy programme
after the death of a patient. The centre was found to have violated regulations
set by the Food and Drug Administration to minimise the risks of such
experimental programmes.

LOAD-DATE: January 24, 2000


                             988 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                           January 1, 2000, Saturday

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 1179 words

HEADLINE: THE NEW MILLENNIUM: SPACE HAS CEASED TO BE THE FINAL FRONTIER. NOW WE
LOOK TO OURSELVES FOR SECRETS OF THE UNIVERSE;
 SCIENCE

BYLINE: Steve Connor

BODY:


    "WE USED to think our future was in the stars. Now we know it's in our
genes." So says Jim Watson, co-discoverer of the DNA double-helix and a pioneer
of the biological revolution that has transformed science in the second half of
the 20th century.

    The past 100 years may have begun with the physical sciences dominant -
epitomised by Albert Einstein's theories of relativity and the splitting of the
atom - but they ended with the rise of the new biology. Genetics and DNA
technology will continue to be the most vibrant area of scientific endeavour in
the early years of the 21st century.

    The Human Genome Project - the global effort to spell out the all 3 billion
letters in our genes - is the clearest sign of the advances being made in
genetics. The first draft of this enormous "book of man" is scheduled to be
published this year, with the full version expected by 2003. For scientists such
as Mr Watson, it means the start of an era when medicine becomes truly
predictive. Instead of waiting for symptoms to appear before treating them, an
intimate knowledge of our genes should enable doctors to anticipate disease and
take effective precautions to prevent it occurring.

    Decoding each of our 80,000 or so genes should also allow us to figure out
the smallest genetic differences between one individual and another. This will
enable doctors to assess, for example, who reacts badly to certain drugs due to
their genetic constitutions, in turn allowing drugs to be tailor-made to suit
the genes of certain individuals. The door will be open to "personalised
medicine" where treatment with custom-built drugs is based on the best interests
of the individual rather than the general population - which is how drugs are
tested in trials today.

    Genes - the smallest units of inheritance - also provide virtually unlimited
possibilities of being manipulated. Past attempts at mending defective DNA by
gene therapy operations have not proved an overwhelming success, but they will
improve. At present, there is a legal and ethical ban on attempts to manipulate
the genes in the "germline" cells - eggs and sperm - because of the implications
of changing the genetic constitution of succeeding generations. However, many
scientists believe a point will come when this ban will have to be reviewed. If
it becomes possible to substitute a healthy gene for a diseased gene in an egg
cell, enabling a mother to have a child free of a crippling genetic disease, who
is to say that this should not be allowed?

    At some point in the coming century, the ethical issues behind germline gene
therapy will be tested. If, or when, it is allowed, the next test will be to
decide what constitutes a "diseased" gene. What if parents want more than just a
guarantee of babies free of genetic illnesses? What if they want to "improve"
their children with genes conferring perceived advantages in appearance or
mental ability? Although the possible advent of "designer babies" has been
greatly exaggerated, the prospect will become more real in the early part of the
21st century.

    The possibility of human cloning creates another ethical minefield. Since
Dolly the sheep, the first adult clone of a mammal, was unveiled in 1997,
scientists have shown it is possible to refine the technique and apply it to a
range of animals, from mice to cattle. In theory there are now few barriers to
the cloning of human beings - a huge step in the development of reproductive
medicine. Cloning would amount to a break with the act of sexual reproduction,
bringing with it fresh ethical concerns about self-identity, sexuality and the
roles of men and women.

    Human cloning does not have universal appeal, and is discouraged or banned
in many countries, including Britain. But times change. It is likely that in the
next five years the Government will approve the use of "therapeutic" cloning to
allow scientists to experiment with growing cloned tissue or organs outside the
body. This envisages a day when replacement organs and tissues can be grown for
transplants. Therapeutic cloning is likely to get government approval in the
near future, and it may be a precedent for full reproductive cloning in years to
come.

    Artificial wombs, where embryos can grow to maturity outside the body of a
woman, ova banks for storing the egg cells of young women for use later in life,
and other startling developments in reproductive medicine will continue to test
our moral boundaries as much as our human ingenuity. Just as the new biology
will be used to extend the choices about how we have children, it will be
employed to limit our own physical and mental decline.

    The nature of ageing itself will be scrutinised as never before in the
coming century. One of the most intriguing areas of research in genetics has
been on the genes that appear to speed up or slow down the ageing process. Much
of this has so far been carried out on laboratory animals, notably the fruit
fly, but some scientists believe there is every chance of being able to
identify, isolate and manipulate the "ageing genes" of humans to extend life far
beyond the biblical allotment of three score years and ten.

    Improvements in housing, medicine and diet have already increased life
expectancy for people in developed countries. The new biology offers a way of
continuing that trend into the 21st century.

    Underpinning all these advances in biology and medicine will be a rise in
the power of computers, the greatest tool of the gene engineers. In the past 50
years, the world has witnessed a 10 billion-fold increase in computing power. By
2020, when microchips are expected to be as cheap as scrap paper, the limits of
silicon -chip technology are due to be reached. Computers by then will have to
be designed using different technology to continue the cost- benefit gains in
digital performance we now expect. Optical computers, which use light beams
instead of electricity, and such things as three- dimensional chips will help to
boost computing power, but a radical redesign of the computer will still be
needed.

    One intriguing possibility is to use the information molecule of life - DNA
- as a biological computer. In theory, it would be possible to make DNA
molecules artificially in the laboratory, encoded with the digital information
of a computer. A pound of DNA molecules suspended in a cubic yard of liquid
would have more memory than all the computers ever made. Just an ounce of DNA
could be 100,000 times faster than the fastest supercomputer.

    A "living" computer made of DNA would be a breakthrough in achieving the
kind of processing needed to understand the most complex organ, the human brain.
We may be able, finally, to decipher that most enigmatic of human attributes -
consciousness.

    Y2K FACTS

    The global population

    in 2000 will exceed 6

    billion, compared with

    3 billion in 1960 and 1 billion in 1804.

    Y2K FACTS

    In 2000, 2 billion people will live in cities in the developing world, twice
the number living in the cities of the rich countries

GRAPHIC: The double helix is at the centre of the new science

LOAD-DATE: January 5, 2000
