
                              54 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2009 EXPRESS NEWSPAPERS
                              All Rights Reserved
                                   Daily Star

                          September 17, 2009 Thursday
                                U.K. 1st Edition

SECTION: NEWS; 4

LENGTH: 67  words

HEADLINE: Hope is in sight

BODY:

   SCIENTISTS using gene therapy have cured colour blindness in monkeys in a
world first that offers hope to millions.

   It could not only allow colour-blind people to tell red from green - it may
restore sight to the blind.

   Researcher Jay Neitz, of the University of Washington in Seattle, said: "If
we could fi nd a way to do this with complete safety in human eyes, we could
correct a lot of vision disorders."

LOAD-DATE: September 18, 2009


                              69 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2009 EXPRESS NEWSPAPERS
                              All Rights Reserved
                                   Daily Star

                              June 19, 2009 Friday
                                U.K. 1st Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; 55

LENGTH: 35  words

HEADLINE: HOT GOSSIP;
IT'S THE BUSINESS

BODY:

   TALK of a US licensing deal drew speculators to gene therapy company Oxford
Biomedica yesterday. Shares in Oxford, which recently announced positive trial
results for its TroVax cancer vaccine, rose ½p to 12½p.

LOAD-DATE: June 23, 2009


                              70 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2009 EXPRESS NEWSPAPERS
                              All Rights Reserved
                                   Daily Star

                              June 19, 2009 Friday
                                U.K. 1st Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; 55

LENGTH: 35  words

HEADLINE: HOT GOSSIP;
IT'S THE BUSINESS

BODY:

   TALK of a US licensing deal drew speculators to gene therapy company Oxford
Biomedica yesterday. Shares in Oxford, which recently announced positive trial
results for its TroVax cancer vaccine, rose ½p to 12½p.

LOAD-DATE: June 23, 2009


                             121 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2008 EXPRESS NEWSPAPERS
                              All Rights Reserved
                                  Sunday Star

                              July 13, 2008 Sunday
                                U.K. 1st Edition

SECTION: NEWS; 23

LENGTH: 360  words

HEADLINE: FRAUD OF THE RINGS

BYLINE: by NEIL CHANDLER

BODY:

   DRUG cheats will use groundbreaking science in their bid to beat the testers
at the Beijing Olympics.

   And it is feared some athletes may go for gold by using state-of-the-art
genetic doping techniques in which they are injected with DNA.

   So-called gene therapy is still not even officially sanctioned for use in
medical cases. But experts predict it could one day see a man run the marathon
in 90 minutes.

   And testers are already working with scientists to devise a way of detecting
it.

   David Howman, pictured left, director general of the World Anti-Doping
Agency, told the Daily Star Sunday in an exclusive interview how the testers
were battling to stay one step ahead of the cheats.

   And he warned athletes that the authorities will be watching them more
closely than ever before.

   He said: "Our preparations are complete. The doping control programme will be
as good as it can get.

   "The number of tests is up a lot - almost half the athletes that are going to
be there will be tested. But the wider question is about the athletes.

   "You have got to ask them, 'Are you guys going to turn up dirty?' "In every
barrel of apples there's a few rotten ones. In this case we have lots of sports
so there will be several barrels and several rotten ones." The last Games in
Athens were scarred by the scandal surrounding Greek runners Katerina Thanou and
Konstantinos Kenteris.

   They both missed drugs tests and then allegedly staged a motorbike crash to
cover their tracks.

   But the new fears over genetic doping could raise the stakes even higher.

   Mr Howman said: "Gene therapy is still being advanced for good health
reasons.

   "It is not being used for that yet because it must go through an ethical
process to make sure it is safe.

   "Are people pirating it and using it for other reasons? I cannot answer that.

   "But we are working very closely with the people involved in it to work out
means and ways of detecting it." And he warned: "There's more than one way to
skin a cat.

   "We don't only rely on collecting samples. There are other ways of getting
evidence.

   "If you look at all the recent big busts most have come from other crime
agencies. That's an additional part of our focus."

GRAPHIC: SCANDAL: Katerina Thanou failed to attend test

LOAD-DATE: July 15, 2008


                             122 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2008 EXPRESS NEWSPAPERS
                              All Rights Reserved
                                  Sunday Star

                              July 13, 2008 Sunday
                                U.K. 1st Edition

SECTION: NEWS; 23

LENGTH: 360  words

HEADLINE: FRAUD OF THE RINGS

BYLINE: by NEIL CHANDLER

BODY:

   DRUG cheats will use groundbreaking science in their bid to beat the testers
at the Beijing Olympics.

   And it is feared some athletes may go for gold by using state-of-the-art
genetic doping techniques in which they are injected with DNA.

   So-called gene therapy is still not even officially sanctioned for use in
medical cases. But experts predict it could one day see a man run the marathon
in 90 minutes.

   And testers are already working with scientists to devise a way of detecting
it.

   David Howman, pictured left, director general of the World Anti-Doping
Agency, told the Daily Star Sunday in an exclusive interview how the testers
were battling to stay one step ahead of the cheats.

   And he warned athletes that the authorities will be watching them more
closely than ever before.

   He said: "Our preparations are complete. The doping control programme will be
as good as it can get.

   "The number of tests is up a lot - almost half the athletes that are going to
be there will be tested. But the wider question is about the athletes.

   "You have got to ask them, 'Are you guys going to turn up dirty?' "In every
barrel of apples there's a few rotten ones. In this case we have lots of sports
so there will be several barrels and several rotten ones." The last Games in
Athens were scarred by the scandal surrounding Greek runners Katerina Thanou and
Konstantinos Kenteris.

   They both missed drugs tests and then allegedly staged a motorbike crash to
cover their tracks.

   But the new fears over genetic doping could raise the stakes even higher.

   Mr Howman said: "Gene therapy is still being advanced for good health
reasons.

   "It is not being used for that yet because it must go through an ethical
process to make sure it is safe.

   "Are people pirating it and using it for other reasons? I cannot answer that.

   "But we are working very closely with the people involved in it to work out
means and ways of detecting it." And he warned: "There's more than one way to
skin a cat.

   "We don't only rely on collecting samples. There are other ways of getting
evidence.

   "If you look at all the recent big busts most have come from other crime
agencies. That's an additional part of our focus."

GRAPHIC: SCANDAL: Katerina Thanou failed to attend test

LOAD-DATE: July 16, 2008


                             138 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2008 Manchester Evening News
                              All Rights Reserved
                            Manchester Evening News

                             April 29, 2008 Tuesday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 376 words

BYLINE: CHRIS OSUH

BODY:

   ATEENAGER who got his sight back after a pioneering operation now plans to
become a pop star.

   Steven Howarth, a student at Wigan and Leigh College, suffers from a rare
condition which meant he could not see anything in the dark.

   He faced going completely blind in his 20s until doctors injected healthy
genes into his right eye to dramatically improve his sight.

   Steven, 18, of Westhoughton, said the operation had opened up a world of
possibilities - including a music career.

   He said: "Now I have more independence I'd love to play gigs with my band The
Malinskys.

   "I'd like to do a national diploma in music and then get a job.

   "The thought I would go blind when I was older used to bring me down but now
my life has changed."

   The operation on Steven's eye means he can now make his own way back from
visiting his girlfriend in Chorley and college pals in Wigan.

   Steven's mum, Adelaida, said: "It's been difficult for Steven to get work
because of his eye condition but hopefully it will be a lot easier now. He will
never be able to drive but the improvement to his vision has given him much more
freedom."

   As reported in later editions of yesterday's M.E.N., Steven had the operation
last July on his 18th birthday and his sight has been steadily improving ever
since.

   He was one of three people to have the operation at Moorfield Eye Hospital,
in London, which involved doctors injecting healthy copies of genes into the
retina. Of the three operations, Steven's was the most successful. Steven's
genetic condition - Lebers Congenital Amaurosis - affects one in 100,000 people.
It was not diagnosed until he was eight.

   The teenager now hopes to have the sight in his left eye improved by the same
procedure.

   The government-funded trial was conducted by a team headed by Professor Robin
Ali and includes eye surgeon James Bainbridge and retinal specialist Professor
Tony Moore. Professor Ali has hailed the trial as a 'very significant milestone'
which paves the way for the development of gene therapy approaches for a range
of eye disorders. Adelaida added: "Steven has been a guinea pig - in a good way.
I think the doctors at Moorfield have been absolutely fantastic.

   "They put an incredible amount of time and effort into helping Steven."

   chris.osuh@men-news.co.uk

GRAPHIC: WORLD OF POSSIBILITIES Steven Howarth's sight has steadily improved
since his operation
HOW THEY DID IT Surgeons inserted healthy genes into Steven's retina to correct
a genetic fault

LOAD-DATE: January 1, 2009


                             141 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                           Copyright 2008 MGN Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                             Daily Record (PM) - UK

                             April 28, 2008 Monday
                                 North Edition

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 863 words

HEADLINE: BRAVE BATTLE OF BUTTERFLY BABY JIM JIM;
 Exclusive VIOLA AND MARTIN LYNCH WATCHED THEIR SON LOSE HIS FIGHT AGAINST A
DEVASTATING SKIN DISEASE THAT RAVAGED HIS TINY BODY. NOW THEY ARE DETERMINED TO
RAISE FUNDS FOR RESEARCH AND TO BOOST AWARENESS ABOUT THE ILLNESS

BYLINE: Natalie Walker

BODY:

    A COUPLE whose baby died from a rare illness that made his skin as fragile
as a butterfly's wing are raising cash to help fine a cure for the condition.

    Viola and Martin Lynch want to prevent other parents going through the
heartache they suffered.

    They have vowed to raise at least pounds 25,000 in their son James's memory.

    The cash will be used to help fund research into gene therapy, the only cure
for the genetic skin condition Epidermolysis Bullosa.

    People with the illness have skin that falls off at the slightest touch.

    Their bodies are constantly covered with huge blisters and open wounds and
they are at high risk of skin cancer.

    Viola, 33, said: "It is a very cruel condition and it breaks our hearts to
know other people will have to go through what we did."

    Doctors first noticed something wrong with their son James's skin as soon as
he was born last April.

    He had blisters all over his body and nails on his fingers and toes were
falling off.

    Tests revealed he had Junctional EB, the most severe form of illness, and
his parents were told he would be lucky to live to see his first birthday.

    Thecouple were specially trained in how to look after their son, who they
nicknamed Jim Jim, and gave him round-the-clock care at their home in Stepps,
near Glasgow.

    Every day, they had to burst dozens of blisters which would appear on
James's tiny body with a needle.

    They also had to wrap him in special bandages to protect his extra-fragile
skin and feed him nine different types of drugs, including morphine, to ease his
pain.

    Viola said: "We felt so cruel doing all that to him but we had to. If we
didn't, he'd feel even worse. But the hardest thing of all was not being able to
hold him. His skin was so weak, we couldn't do anything that would cause
friction.

    "We couldn't hug him or even bath him because he was so delicate. Even
putting his clothes on was tricky, as we had to gently roll him so his skin did
not break or come away."

    Former sales rep Viola told how one of the most harrowing symptoms was
watching pieces of her son's skin fall off.

    She said: "There was a day I was feeding him, when I touched the back of his
head and this huge clump of skin and hair came away, it was like he was just
falling apart.

    "That night, I just cried and cried. He was just a defenceless baby and
should not have had to go through that and there was nothing I could do to
protect him.

    "There were days when he had raw patches all over his body and you could see
bits of bone.

    "And it smelled, too, like bad flesh. It broke our hearts.

    "His fingers were just so sad to see, they'd weld together and just become
one massive piece of skin." Viola, whose mum and aunt came over from Hong Kong
to help her care from James, sat by her son's bedside every night watching over
him to make sure he did not roll about and damage his skin.

    By last September, the family knew James, who was five months old, was
deteriorating when he stopped feeding and they travelled to the kids' hospice,
Robin House in Balloch, West Dunbartonshire, for his final few days.

    IT consultant Martin, 43, said: "Jim Jim was taken from us very early and
words can't express how much it tore us apart.

    "But after what he'd been through and his brave, brave fight, we were
relieved his pain was finally over.

    "When he died, we got to hold him for just the second time. The first was
when he was born and it was wonderful to be able to do that without worrying
about his pain." Martin, who also has a 15-year-old daughter, raised pounds 1500
for Robin House by completing a half marathon.

    The couple now want to raise thousands of pounds for the charity Debra, the
only one dedicated to caring for people with EB.

    They have also decided to become spokespeople for the charity and will
travel around the country raising awareness and funds for the specialist
charity.

    Martin said: "From the minute James was diagnosed, we had support from
nurses provided by Debra and we would never have coped without them.

    They were outstanding."

    Viola and Martin hope to raise cash for the charity - which funds research
into gene therapy for the illness - at Glasgow's Great Scottish Walk on Sunday,
May 11.

    To sponsor Martin and Viola, visit www.justgiving.com/jimjim

    WHAT IS EPIDERMOLYSIS BULLOSA?

    IT is a rare genetic condition in which the skin blisters at the slightest
knock, causing painful, open wounds.

    In severe cases, such as James's, it also strikes in the intestines, bladder
and airways.

    Just over 350 people have the illness in Scotland.

    People with the more severe form have a high risk of developing skin cancer.

    Experts at Dundee University recently identified the genes which cause the
condition.

    Both parents must be carriers of the faulty gene for it to be passed on.

    But as yet there is no effective treatment or a cure. Experts say the only
way to stop EB is through gene therapy, when faulty genes are prevented from
being passed on.

    EB is also known as butterfly skin because it leaves patients with skin as
fragile as a butterfly's wing.

    'It is a very cruel condition and it breaks our hearts to know other people
will have to through what we did'

GRAPHIC:  CRUEL BLOW: Baby Jim Jim, whose tiny body was hit by a virulent skin
disorder
 BRAVE: Martin and Viola Lynch are raising funds to help find a cure for the
illness that killed their son, Jim Jim PICTURE: GEORGE HUNTER

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 2008


                             142 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                           Copyright 2008 MGN Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                             Daily Record (PM) - UK

                             April 28, 2008 Monday
                                Streets Edition

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 25

LENGTH: 863 words

HEADLINE: vital: BRAVE BATTLE OF BUTTERFLY BABY JIM JIM;
 Exclusive VIOLA AND MARTIN LYNCH WATCHED THEIR SON LOSE HIS FIGHT AGAINST A
DEVASTATING SKIN DISEASE THAT RAVAGED HIS TINY BODY. NOW THEY ARE DETERMINED TO
RAISE FUNDS FOR RESEARCH AND TO BOOST AWARENESS ABOUT THE ILLNESS

BYLINE: Natalie Walker

BODY:

    A COUPLE whose baby died from a rare illness that made his skin as fragile
as a butterfly's wing are raising cash to help fine a cure for the condition.

    Viola and Martin Lynch want to prevent other parents going through the
heartache they suffered.

    They have vowed to raise at least pounds 25,000 in their son James's memory.

    The cash will be used to help fund research into gene therapy, the only cure
for the genetic skin condition Epidermolysis Bullosa.

    People with the illness have skin that falls off at the slightest touch.

    Their bodies are constantly covered with huge blisters and open wounds and
they are at high risk of skin cancer.

    Viola, 33, said: "It is a very cruel condition and it breaks our hearts to
know other people will have to go through what we did."

    Doctors first noticed something wrong with their son James's skin as soon as
he was born last April.

    He had blisters all over his body and nails on his fingers and toes were
falling off.

    Tests revealed he had Junctional EB, the most severe form of illness, and
his parents were told he would be lucky to live to see his first birthday.

    Thecouple were specially trained in how to look after their son, who they
nicknamed Jim Jim, and gave him round-the-clock care at their home in Stepps,
near Glasgow.

    Every day, they had to burst dozens of blisters which would appear on
James's tiny body with a needle.

    They also had to wrap him in special bandages to protect his extra-fragile
skin and feed him nine different types of drugs, including morphine, to ease his
pain.

    Viola said: "We felt so cruel doing all that to him but we had to. If we
didn't, he'd feel even worse. But the hardest thing of all was not being able to
hold him. His skin was so weak, we couldn't do anything that would cause
friction.

    "We couldn't hug him or even bath him because he was so delicate. Even
putting his clothes on was tricky, as we had to gently roll him so his skin did
not break or come away."

    Former sales rep Viola told how one of the most harrowing symptoms was
watching pieces of her son's skin fall off.

    She said: "There was a day I was feeding him, when I touched the back of his
head and this huge clump of skin and hair came away, it was like he was just
falling apart.

    "That night, I just cried and cried. He was just a defenceless baby and
should not have had to go through that and there was nothing I could do to
protect him.

    "There were days when he had raw patches all over his body and you could see
bits of bone.

    "And it smelled, too, like bad flesh. It broke our hearts.

    "His fingers were just so sad to see, they'd weld together and just become
one massive piece of skin." Viola, whose mum and aunt came over from Hong Kong
to help her care from James, sat by her son's bedside every night watching over
him to make sure he did not roll about and damage his skin.

    By last September, the family knew James, who was five months old, was
deteriorating when he stopped feeding and they travelled to the kids' hospice,
Robin House in Balloch, West Dunbartonshire, for his final few days.

    IT consultant Martin, 43, said: "Jim Jim was taken from us very early and
words can't express how much it tore us apart.

    "But after what he'd been through and his brave, brave fight, we were
relieved his pain was finally over.

    "When he died, we got to hold him for just the second time. The first was
when he was born and it was wonderful to be able to do that without worrying
about his pain." Martin, who also has a 15-year-old daughter, raised pounds 1500
for Robin House by completing a half marathon.

    The couple now want to raise thousands of pounds for the charity Debra, the
only one dedicated to caring for people with EB.

    They have also decided to become spokespeople for the charity and will
travel around the country raising awareness and funds for the specialist
charity.

    Martin said: "From the minute James was diagnosed, we had support from
nurses provided by Debra and we would never have coped without them.

    They were outstanding."

    Viola and Martin hope to raise cash for the charity - which funds research
into gene therapy for the illness - at Glasgow's Great Scottish Walk on Sunday,
May 11.

    To sponsor Martin and Viola, visit www.justgiving.com/jimjim

    WHAT IS EPIDERMOLYSIS BULLOSA?

    IT is a rare genetic condition in which the skin blisters at the slightest
knock, causing painful, open wounds.

    In severe cases, such as James's, it also strikes in the intestines, bladder
and airways.

    Just over 350 people have the illness in Scotland.

    People with the more severe form have a high risk of developing skin cancer.

    Experts at Dundee University recently identified the genes which cause the
condition.

    Both parents must be carriers of the faulty gene for it to be passed on.

    But as yet there is no effective treatment or a cure. Experts say the only
way to stop EB is through gene therapy, when faulty genes are prevented from
being passed on.

    EB is also known as butterfly skin because it leaves patients with skin as
fragile as a butterfly's wing.

    'It is a very cruel condition and it breaks our hearts to know other people
will have to through what we did'

GRAPHIC:  CRUEL BLOW: Baby Jim Jim, whose tiny body was hit by a virulent skin
disorder
 BRAVE: Martin and Viola Lynch are raising funds to help find a cure for the
illness that killed their son, Jim Jim PICTURE: GEORGE HUNTER

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 2008


                             157 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                           Copyright 2008 MGN Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                             Daily Record (PM) - UK

                             April 18, 2008 Friday
                                Streets Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 37

LENGTH: 79 words

HEADLINE: Magnet cure for cancer

BODY:

    TINY magnets are being used to attack cancer tumours.

    The "nanomagnets" are put into white blood cells packed with cancer-fighting
genes.

    A stronger magnet is held over the tumour to draw the blood cells to it.

    Scientists at Sheffield University developed the treatment and are checking
how well it works.

    They say it could also be used to target arthritic joints or fight heart
disease.

    Lab chief Professor Claire Lews said: "This could herald a new era in gene
therapy."

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 2008


                             305 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2006 EXPRESS NEWSPAPERS
                              All Rights Reserved
                                  Sunday Star

                            December 3, 2006 Sunday
                                U.K. 1st Edition

SECTION: NEWS; 6

LENGTH: 39  words

HEADLINE: NO HEADLINE

BODY:

   TESTS are to start in the UK of a new gene therapy treatment for cystic
fibrosis which could transform the lives of patients. It could offer hope to
Chancellor Gordon Brown and his wife whose baby has been diagnosed with the
condition.

LOAD-DATE: December 5, 2006


                             321 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2006 Manchester Evening News
                              All Rights Reserved
                            Manchester Evening News

                            November 13, 2006 Monday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 330 words

HEADLINE: Trials to begin on vaccine that attacks cancer cells

BYLINE: amanda crook

BODY:

   AMAJOR cancer vaccine that can trigger sufferers' immune systems to recognise
and attack diseased cells is to be tested in Manchester.

   Doctors say drug TroVax has already produced "striking" immune responses
during initial tests at the cancer centre in the Christie Hospital. It is one of
the first gene-therapy treatments to receive a large clinical trial.

   The vaccine works by targeting a molecule, named 5T4, which is found in most
tumours, but not in other body cells.

   Now 700 people across Europe and the US will be treated with the vaccine.
Scientists believe the drug will particularly help colo-rectal, prostate and
breast cancer sufferers.

   Patients recruited for the assessment will first have to undergo surgery to
remove any cancerous tumours. They will then be injected with TroVax 13 times
over a year.

   Prof Robert Hawkins, the project's lead trial doctor, said: "The trials so
far have been very encouraging, very successful at producing an immune response.

   "The trials will tell us if the vaccine can tackle the cancer in combination
with other drugs."

   Manufacturers hope to finish the trials and get the treatment licensed for
general use by 2009. John Halstead, 60, a motor mechanic from Rochdale, is one
of a handful of patients to receive two doses of the vaccine as part of an
earlier trial at the Christie.

   He was diagnosed with kidney cancer in June.

   Mr Halstead said: "I passed blood in my urine and my wife insisted I see the
doctor. He sent me to a specialist and they found a tumour in my kidney and
three in my lungs. I felt fine, so I was gob-smacked.

   "I feel lucky that my doctor is running this trial so I can have this
treatment years before other people.

   "I'm proud, too, that I might help to find a better treatment for people in
the future."

   Prof Peter Stern, of Manchester University, who helped to create the vaccine,
said: "What is so exciting about 5T4 is that it could potentially be used to
tackle all these different diseases."

   amanda.crook@men-news.co.uk

LOAD-DATE: January 1, 2007


                             322 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2006 Manchester Evening News
                              All Rights Reserved
                            Manchester Evening News

                            November 13, 2006 Monday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 330 words

HEADLINE: Trials to begin on vaccine that attacks cancer cells

BYLINE: amanda crook

BODY:

   AMAJOR cancer vaccine that can trigger sufferers' immune systems to recognise
and attack diseased cells is to be tested in Manchester.

   Doctors say drug TroVax has already produced "striking" immune responses
during initial tests at the cancer centre in the Christie Hospital. It is one of
the first gene-therapy treatments to receive a large clinical trial.

   The vaccine works by targeting a molecule, named 5T4, which is found in most
tumours, but not in other body cells.

   Now 700 people across Europe and the US will be treated with the vaccine.
Scientists believe the drug will particularly help colo-rectal, prostate and
breast cancer sufferers.

   Patients recruited for the assessment will first have to undergo surgery to
remove any cancerous tumours. They will then be injected with TroVax 13 times
over a year.

   Prof Robert Hawkins, the project's lead trial doctor, said: "The trials so
far have been very encouraging, very successful at producing an immune response.

   "The trials will tell us if the vaccine can tackle the cancer in combination
with other drugs."

   Manufacturers hope to finish the trials and get the treatment licensed for
general use by 2009. John Halstead, 60, a motor mechanic from Rochdale, is one
of a handful of patients to receive two doses of the vaccine as part of an
earlier trial at the Christie.

   He was diagnosed with kidney cancer in June.

   Mr Halstead said: "I passed blood in my urine and my wife insisted I see the
doctor. He sent me to a specialist and they found a tumour in my kidney and
three in my lungs. I felt fine, so I was gob-smacked.

   "I feel lucky that my doctor is running this trial so I can have this
treatment years before other people.

   "I'm proud, too, that I might help to find a better treatment for people in
the future."

   Prof Peter Stern, of Manchester University, who helped to create the vaccine,
said: "What is so exciting about 5T4 is that it could potentially be used to
tackle all these different diseases."

   amanda.crook@men-news.co.uk

LOAD-DATE: September 17, 2007


                             357 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2006 Manchester Evening News
                              All Rights Reserved
                            Manchester Evening News

                             July 5, 2006 Wednesday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 660 words

HEADLINE: Cash joy for Christie drug-trial pioneers

BYLINE: amanda crook

BODY:

   CHRISTIE hospital is set to get about £7m to double the number of patients on
pioneering cancer drug trials.

   The cash will allow the Withington hospital's early clinical trials unit,
already one of the biggest in Britain, to expand into one of the world's top
cancer research centres.

   Last year almost 2,500 cancer patients received experimental treatments as
part of 126 different trials at the 12-bed unit, which is run jointly with the
Patterson Institute and Manchester University.

   People who take part in Christie trials are existing patients who volunteer
for new treatments, often after existing treatments have failed. They are
closely monitored throughout the trial by a specialist team.

   But bosses of the Manchester Cancer Research Centre say the unit, which was
built three years ago, can't cater for all the patients who want to take part in
trials.

   This grant, which is still being finalised, is part of an £84m combined
government and charity grant to 10 different centres across the country and will
pay for the unit to expand on to a second floor and provide cutting-edge
equipment.

   Caroline Shaw, chief executive of Christie, said: "This is fantastic news for
cancer research, for Manchester and for our patients. Clinical trials are the
vital step in developing treatments, which can go on to save lives.

   "Local patients may be the first to benefit from access to the newest
treatments. If they have already failed to respond to conventional cancer
treatments this may be a key opportunity."

   It is hoped the expanded facility will open in the New Year and work will
start immediately on detailed plans.

   Current clinical trials are focused particularly on gene therapy to help the
immune system fight cancer, drugs that target specific weakness in tumour cells
and "growth inhibitors", which cut the blood supply to tumours to stop them
growing.

   The unit already recruits more patients than any other hospital to phase one
trials - the very first stage of testing new drugs, looking at its
effectiveness, dosage and safety. If these trials are successful the drugs will
be tested on larger numbers of patients.

   Christie has pioneered cancer research since 1901 when they used Roentgen
x-rays for cancer therapy. They ran the first clinical trial for a new breast
cancer drug in 1944 and invented photo-dynamic therapy for skin cancer in 1996.
It was also a key test centre for the new generation of breast cancer drugs,
aromatase inhibitors, which will replace tamoxifen as the gold standard
treatment to stop cancer returning in post-menopausal women.

   Nic Jones, director of the Manchester Cancer Research Centre, said: "This
expansion will establish Manchester as one of the best centres in the world for
early stage trials, which in turn will help attract more cancer experts.

   "The goal of the centre is to develop and expand cancer research in the city
over the next 5-8 years, and part of this funding will aid the expansion of
clinical research facilities at the Christie, to provide increased access for
patients to clinical trials of potential new drugs and therapies."

   The UK Clinical Research Collaboration, a partnership between the Wellcome
Trust, British Heart Foundation, Cancer Research UK, the Wolfson Foundation, the
Medical Research Council, and the Department of Health, aims to boost
experimental medicine across the country.

   Health Minister Andy Burnham, welcomed the announcement.

   The MP for Leigh, near Wigan, said "This investment demonstrates the
commitment of the government and key partners to establish Britain as a world
leader in clinical research.

   "The NHS plays a vital role in translating medical advances from the
laboratory bench to the patient's bedside. This initiative is an essential step
that will ultimately lead to improving the care we offer patients and the
public."

   This successful bid comes after Manchester University won funding to
establish the Wellcome Trust Clinical Research Facility on Grafton Street in
1997.

LOAD-DATE: July 5, 2006


                             365 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2006 Manchester Evening News
                              All Rights Reserved
                            Manchester Evening News

                             May 31, 2006 Wednesday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 354 words

BYLINE: seb ramsay

BODY:

   A TEAM of Manchester scientists has come up with a diabetes treatment that
could prevent thousands of amputations every year.

   Trials on a protein injection developed at Manchester University have shown
it can prevent and even reverse nerve disease in diabetes sufferers by
stimulating their own genes.

   About half of all people with long-term diabetes develop some form of nerve
damage - neuropathy.

   And the condition is responsible for the vast majority of non-emergency
amputations - usually to hands or feet.

   Lead researcher Prof David Tomlinson says the study has massive potential for
preventing thousands of foot amputations each year.

   "The vast majority of non-traumatic hand and foot amputations carried out in
British hospitals are caused by diabetes," he said.

   "There are currently no treatments available to prevent or slow the progress
of nerve disease in diabetic patients.

   "Our tests have shown that a single injection of a DNA-binding protein
protected nerve function, stimulated nerve growth and prevented tissue damage
that in humans can lead to limb loss." Though neuropathy is common, it does not
always lead to amputation.

   It can simply cause numbness and sometimes pain and weakness in the hands,
arms, feet and legs.

   But problems may also be caused in other organs, including the heart,
kidneys, sex organs, eyes and digestive tract.

   Early tests carried on 12 patients in the US have been very encouraging, said
Prof Tomlinson, based in the university's faculty of life sciences.

   "Diabetic neuropathy is a major problem in insulin-dependent diabetes,
particularly in patients who have had the disease for a period of time.

   "Our approach to gene therapy is quite different from previous attempts at
treatment.

   "We use a DNA-binding protein called ZFP TFTM to poke life into the patient's
own genes and produce a growth factor that has a role in nerve protection and
regeneration. We have had some striking success."

   Diabetes, a condition in which the amount of glucose in the blood is too
high, is increasing dramatically.

   The World Health Organisation estimates that some 300m people worldwide could
be affected by 2025.

GRAPHIC: RESEARCH LEADER . . . Prof Tomlinson says nerve damage could be
prevented or reversed

LOAD-DATE: May 31, 2006


                             409 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2005 Manchester Evening News
                            Manchester Evening News

                                 August 3, 2005

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 362 words

HEADLINE: Ex-crime buster on the trail of cancer

BYLINE: by richard bramwell

BODY:



   DR CHRIS Ward might have left school without an A-level to his name. But
Chris, 34, a former police scenes-of- crime and fingerprint man, has more than
made up for it.

   He is leading a pioneering research project in Manchester aimed at stopping
cancer in its tracks. Using controversial stem cells from a human embryo,
scientist Chris is investigating how and why those cells spread. His findings
will then be related to cancer in the hope of halting the killer disease.

   The research is the first of its kind in the world and the findings will be
applied to the most common form of cancer - known as carcinoma - which makes up
80 to 90 per cent of all cancers. Chris, who is based at Manchester University,
said: "In most cases it is the uncontrolled spread of the cancer that kills
people. "It is very difficult to study in patients. The advantage of using
embryonic stem cells is that the spreading of the cells occurs naturally and we
can view the whole process in real time. "At the end of this project, we hope to
have identified molecules that either encourage or prevent the spread of cancer.
Ideally we will have achieved both. It is very, very exciting and nobody else in
the world is doing this."

   Spending his working day in the lab is a world away from Chris's old job -
scouring stolen cars or the homes of burglary victims for clues. He worked in
forensics for the Metropolitan Police in the 1990s, but decided he needed more
academic stimulation than it could offer.

   He went on to get a degree in applied biology and a PhD in cancer gene
therapy, before working as a researcher at the Paterson Institute at
Manchester's Christie Hospital. Chris moved to the university last year.
Controversy surrounds the use of embryonic stem cells and opponents claim it is
morally wrong to experiment on them.

   But Chris hopes his research - using cells frozen since 2000 and supplied by
other scientists - will one day lead to a breakthrough in the cancer battle.
Derek Napier, chief executive of the Association for International Cancer
Research, which is funding the research, said: "We hope it will lead to the
design of new therapies."

GRAPHIC: HUNTING for clues . . . Dr Ward is doing pioneering cancer research
Picture: CONSTANTINE TOFALOS

LOAD-DATE: January 1, 2006


                             432 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2005 Express Newspapers
                                   Daily Star

                                  June 4, 2005

SECTION: U.K. 1st Edition; BUSINESS; Pg. 48

LENGTH: 49 words

HEADLINE: HOT GOSSIP; IT'S THE BUSINESS

BODY:

    SHARES of gene therapy company Oxford Biomedica were sent up 2.5p to 31.25p
by the news of a breakthrough collaboration with Viragen to develop a drug to
treat malignant melanoma from a protein in hens' eggs. The word is that there
are more deals due to be announced in the coming weeks.

LOAD-DATE: June 10, 2005


                             434 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2005 Manchester Evening News
                            Manchester Evening News

                                  May 6, 2005

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 394 words

HEADLINE: Joely, the little fighter

BODY:



   CHILDREN'S first weeks and months at school are always difficult for parents.
For Carey Ryan-Carter, letting her daughter Joely step into the outside world is
exceptionally hard.

   Since Joely was diagnosed with cystic fibrosis at four months old, family
life for Carey, her husband Adam and their son, Jay, seven, has centred on her
care - with medication, physiotherapy, doctors' appointments and continuous
hope. Joely, now four, is settling at Brookburn primary school, Chorlton.

   But while she might look like any other schoolgirl, Joely's day-to-day life
still involves medication and physiotherapy. Her mum must go into school every
day to administer the various drugs to keep her healthy. Worrying

   The strict routine does not dampen Joely's spirits - her family say she
always wants to have fun. Carey, 35, who gave up a teaching career to care for
Joely, cannot talk about her daughter's health without touching wood - a common
cold could be life-threatening. She said: "We have tried to become much more
relaxed, but every time I go into a school and hear a child cough, I look round
and I'm worrying. "But it's important that Joely can lead a normal life and she
loves going to school.

   She hates to wear anything but her uniform. When she was first diagnosed it
was a real shock and we were constantly afraid. There are still periods of time
when I think about how frail she is, but she's a very strong person and loves
getting on with school." Since finding out more about Joely's condition, her
family have organised and taken part in events to raise money for the Cystic
Fibrosis Trust, which is researching gene therapy.

   Carey said: "It could take the life-threatening element away and stop us
worrying about that all the time." Joely recently met Manchester United stars
Wayne Rooney and Gary Neville to promote an event at Old Trafford on May 14 and
15 to raise money for the CF Trust.

   Both her parents will be taking part. It involves a zip-slide - a
hair-raising ride between two stands at the ground - in spite of Adam's fear of
heights. Carey said: "Joely didn't know who the footballers were until she met
them, but now she can't stop talking about them. Wayne Rooney was really sweet.
He is right behind the campaign."

   For more information about the event call 020 8290 7904 or e-mail:
events@cftrust.org.uk

GRAPHIC: JOELY and brother Jay . . . a common cold could put her life in danger
Picture: ANDREW YATES

LOAD-DATE: May 6, 2005


                             440 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2005 Express Newspapers
                                   Daily Star

                                 April 30, 2005

SECTION: U.K. 1st Edition; BUSINESS; Pg. 46

LENGTH: 189 words

HEADLINE: DRUGS PROFITS TUMBLE; IT'S THE BUSINESS

BODY:

    CASH spent on launching new drugs sent profits tumbling at FTSE 100 member
Shire Pharmaceuticals yesterday.

    Britain's third largest drugs maker saw threemonth profits fall from £58
million to £12.5m.

    But the City expected the drop and shares dipped 1p to 546.5p.

    Marketing costs rose 31% to £82m on the launch of four new products,
including epilepsy treatment Carbatrol.

    Research and development costs also jumped, from £20m to £58m, nearly half
of which went on attention deficit treatment NRP104, which is currently in
trials.

    Best-selling hyperactivity drug Adderall saw sales rise 4% to £76m, but
growth was held back by wholesalers building up stocks ahead of a December price
increase.

    Adderall held on to its 25% share of its US market, despite its withdrawal
in Canada over safety fears.

    It said talks with Canadian authorities were "amicable" and could be
resolved by summer.

    Shares in Shire fell 10% last week after it announced the planned £800m
purchase of US group Transkaryotic Therapies.

    Shire chief executive Matthew Emmens said the majority of shareholders
backed the deal.

LOAD-DATE: May 3, 2005


                             489 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2005 Express Newspapers
                                   Daily Star

                                January 24, 2005

SECTION: U.K. 1st Edition; TV2; Pg. 33

LENGTH: 286 words

HEADLINE: TELLY MOVIES

BYLINE: ALAN FRANK

BODY:

    OUT OF THE CLOUDS (1955) *** C4, 12.50-2.15pm. Drama.

    Passengers, aircrew and groundstaff are stranded when an airport is
fogbound.

    Starring Anthony Steel.

    HIT AND RUN (TVM, 1999) *** Five, 3.40-5.30pm. Drama. Motorist Margaret
Colin knocks down a young girl and then tries to pass it off as a hit-andrun
accident. Also starring Lisa Vidal and Drew Pillsbury.

    DEEP BLUE SEA (1999) **** Five, 9.00-11.05pm. Thriller. Scientists use gene
therapy to create intelligent sharks that run amok in an undersea research
establishment. Co-starring Samuel L Jackson and Saffron Burrows.

    THE FLY (1986) ***** C4, 11.50pm1.35am. Shocker. Obsessed scientist Jeff
Goldblum's ill-fated experiments in the transmission of matter go horribly wrong
and transform him into a bizarre creature that is part fly, part man and all
grisly. Also starring Geena Davis and John Getz.

    MAD LOVE (1995) * ITV1 (not Grampian, STV), 12.05-1.45am.

    Drama. When his responsibilities become too much for him, teenage college
student Chris O'Donnell rescues his girlfriend Drew Barrymore from an
institution and they go on the run. Co-starring Joan Allen.

    CHAMELEON (1995) *** BBC1, 12.05-1.55am. Thriller. Anthony LaPaglia goes
undercover to track down those responsible for the brutal murder of his family.
Co-starring Kevin Pollak.

    LAST RITES (TVM, 1998) **** Grampian, STV 12.05-1.45am.

    Thriller. Serial killer Randy Quaid escapes the electric chair when
lightning strikes the prison and he comes to without any memory of his past,
leaving psychiatrist Embeth Davidtz to try and figure out whether he is simply
swinging the lead.

    STAR RATINGS

    *****Don't miss it ****Good ***Average **Time filler *Garbage!

LOAD-DATE: January 24, 2005


                             523 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2004 Express Newspapers
                                   Daily Star

                                 August 1, 2004

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 32

LENGTH: 750 words

HEADLINE: GENE DOPING SCANDAL ROCKS GAMES; FOOLS' GOLD

BYLINE: EXCLUSIVE by NEIL CHANDLER

BODY:

    DRUGS cheats are using state-of-the-art genetic engineering to help them
land gold at the Athens Olympics.

    Stop-at-nothing athletes are desperate to get the technology that can
transform them into muscular freaks easily able to smash world records.

    The new method - called "gene doping" - cannot be detected and officials
fear some cheats will use the science to land top medals.

    Some sportsmen have already contacted scientists working in the field to
help them become sporting superstars. Genetics expert H Lee Sweeney of the
University of Pennsylvania even had an American high school football coach
wanting the treatment for his entire squad.

    Professor Sweeney said: "I told him it was not available for humans, it may
not be safe and if I helped him we could go to jail."

    The science has never been used on humans and won't be declared safe for
another ten years. But the athletes are excited by the professor's experiments,
which have turned mice into "mighty mice".

    He fiddled with the animals' genes so they had increased levels of IGF-1, a
protein which grows and repairs muscles.

    It gave the mice greater than normal strength, which they never lost.

    And because the protein occurs naturally, it would not show up in a normal
drugs test.

    Sweeney and his team are working on treatment to help the elderly and those
suffering from muscle-wasting diseases.

    But he admitted: "Unfortunately it is also a dream come true for an athlete
bent on doping.

    "The chemicals are indistinguishable from their natural counterparts and as
nothing enters the bloodstream, officials will have nothing to detect in a blood
or urine test."

    He said the only way drugs testers could find anything wrong was if they
took a sample of an athlete's muscles - a biopsy - and tested that.

    Frederick Donze, of the World Anti-Doping Agency, said: "We know some
athletes are ready to do anything to cheat and to submit their bodies to high
risks. Therefore we assume that at least some athletes would be prepared to try
this."

    Last month, panicked Olympic officials held meetings to discuss this latest
threat to sport.

    Undetectable performance enhancers are the Holy Grail for many athletes and
too often scientists are prepared to get into the drugs market.

    A San Francisco lab which created "undetectable" designer steroids and
supplied many top athletes caused a major storm when a whistleblower tipped off
the authorities.

    UK sprint medal hope Dwain Chambers and US sprinter Kelli White were banned,
while US sprinters Marion Jones and Tim Montgomery still face doping charges
over the designer steroid THG.

    SCIENCE OF CHEATING The banned supplements some athletes take in the chase
for medals

    TESTOSTERONE What it is: The original anabolic steroid.

    What it does: Increases muscle mass and speeds recovery between training
sessions.

    AMPHETAMINE What it is: The stimulant known as speed.

    What it does: Acts on the nervous system, increasing alertness and combating
fatigue. Used to ensure a ferocious gym session or to get a buzz before a race.

    HUMAN GROWTH HORMONE (HGH) What it is: Natural substance produced by
pituitary gland in the brain. Controls muscle and bone growth and reduces fat.

    What it does: With exercise, causes greater muscle growth.

    ERYTHROPOIETIN (EPO) What it is: Naturally produced by the kidneys, it
stimulates production of red blood cells.

    What it does: The more red blood cells, the more oxygen gets to the muscles.
Popular with endurance athletes, especially cyclists.

    TETRAHYDROGESTRINONE (THG) What it is: Laboratory-altered version of a
banned drug engineered to beat the tests.

    What it does: Gives the benefit of a steroid while evading the drugs
testers.

    GENE THERAPY What it is: Altering an athlete's genes to make them bigger,
stronger and faster.

    What it does: Turns you into a genetically-engineered superman.

    NANDROLONE What it is: The most widely-used anabolic steroid, a derivative
of testosterone.

    What it does: With good diet and exercise, increases bulk and recovery
powers. Also boosts aggression.

    MODAFINIL What it is: A stimulant similar to ephedrine.

    What it does: Stimulates nervous system and combats tiredness.

    Rally drivers use it too. Thought to be used alongside THG.

    CREATINE What it is: Naturally occurring amino acid which stores energy for
explosive effort.

    What it does: Athletes say it increases strength and speed while cutting
body fat.

LOAD-DATE: August 2, 2004


                             525 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2004 Manchester Evening News
                            Manchester Evening News

                                 July 29, 2004

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 176 words

HEADLINE: TV star Will Mellor met his match at the launch of charity abseil in
aid of children with cystic fibrosis.

BODY:



   TV star Will Mellor met his match at the launch of charity abseil in aid of
children with cystic fibrosis.  Little fighter Melanie Cleary, aged eight, who
has the life-threatening condition, joined Will at Manchester United's Old
Trafford ground to encourage others to sign up for the 100ft abseil down the
East Stand.

    Those taking part in the challenge will be joining more than 600
fund-raisers, former United stars and celebrity supporters, who will also be
making the descent at the Theatre of Dreams on September 4 and 5. Will hopes
soccer fans from across Manchester will join him to raise vital funds for the
estimated 7,500 young people who, like Melanie, suffer daily from the effects of
cystic fibrosis.  All the money raised from the abseil will go directly to the
Cystic Fibrosis Trust's £15m gene therapy research project, which carries the
best hopes for a cure for the condition.  To take part in the Manchester United
abseil, call the Cystic Fibrosis Trust events hotline on 020 8290 7904 or email
events@cftrust.org.uk


GRAPHIC: MY HERO . . . Melanie wishes Will luck with a big kiss as he launches
the abseil Picture: CHRIS GLEAVE

LOAD-DATE: January 13, 2005


                             551 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2004 Express Newspapers
                                   Daily Star

                               February 19, 2004

SECTION: TV; Pg. 41

LENGTH: 296 words

HEADLINE: TELLY MOVIES

BYLINE: ALAN FRANK

BODY:

    ASTERIX THE GAUL (1967) *** BBC-2 11.00 am-12.10 pm. More comic-book capers
featuring the legendary ancient hero Asterix who battles with the help of a
druid's magic potion to defend Gaul against the invading Roman forces in the
year 50 BC.

    A CHALLENGE FOR ROBIN HOOD (1967) *** C4 1.00-2.45 pm. Family adventure.
Barrie Ingham pulls on his tights to play the famous outlaw of Sherwood Forest
who gives villainous sheriff of Nottingham John Arnatt a bad time.

    TIGER BAY (1959) b/w **** BBC-2 1.10-3.00 pm. Thriller. A 12-year-old Hayley
Mills (who was making her movie debut) is kidnapped by a killer after she
witnesses sailor Horst Buchholz murder his former girlfriend.

    PANIC IN THE SKIES! (TVM, 1998) *** Five 3.35-5.30 pm. Thriller. An
inexperienced passenger and a stewardess are faced with landing an airliner
after lightning kills the pilots in mid-flight. Sounds like Airplane! but it's
seriously intended!

    DEEP BLUE SEA (1999) **** Five 9.00-11.05 pm. Shocker. Scientists use
illegal gene therapy to create intelligent sharks that run amok in an undersea
research establishment and threaten the lives of people trying to escape to the
surface. Co-starring Samuel L Jackson, Saffron Burrows and LL Cool J.

    BEFORE WOMEN HAD WINGS (TVM, 1997) *** BBC-2 12.20-1.50 am. Melodrama. Ellen
Barkin becomes increasingly more violent and dependent on alcohol after the
death of her husband in 1960s Florida, straining her relationship with her two
daughters. Co-starring Oprah Winfrey and John Savage.

    BOYS ON THE SIDE (1995) ** BBC1 12.25-2.15 am. Comedy-drama.

    Three very different women who have gone on the road for various reasons
bond and give each other the support they've always craved. Starring Whoopi
Goldberg and Matthew McConaughey.

LOAD-DATE: February 19, 2004


                             560 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2004 Manchester Evening News
                            Manchester Evening News

                                January 28, 2004

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 336 words

HEADLINE: ML's £14m cash call to investors

BYLINE: patricia roberts

BODY:



   CASH-strapped ML Laboratories, today asked shareholders to give it the
finances to survive by announcing plans to raise £14.3m in a share rights issue.
The Warrington-based bio-tech firm, which has pioneered new treatments for
serious diseases including cancer, has warned that if it does not get the new
money, it cannot carry on.

   Full-year results for the year ended September 30, reveal today that turnover
has halved, down from £13.2m to £6.5m, with losses of £2.6m. The company is
proposing a one-for-four rights issue of 39.5m new ordinary shares and issue for
cash of 31m new ordinary shares, both at 22p a share, to raise the new finance.
The issue has been underwritten by Panmure Gordon.  The company will ask for the
go-ahead for the move at an extraordinary general meeting at Manchester's
Midland Hotel on February 20.

   ML has already gone through a major restructuring and cost-cutting exercise,
in a bid to get back on track, raising £13.5m by selling off some of its
interests, axing virtually half of its workforce, from 248 to 126, and bringing
in boardroom changes. These included the resignation of founder, Manchester
entrepreneur Kevin Leech as chairman, and his replacement by former chief
executive Stuart Sim. The company's ambitions have suffered a blow because
"milestone" income from its developments, needed to fund future research has
been slow in coming in.

   It wants the working capital of £14.3m to be able to carry out its drug
development and commercialisation programme. Despite the difficulties, Mr Sim
today insisted that prospects for the company were good, and that the directors
viewed the future "with confidence".  The business already generates income from
products which it has successfully developed and licensed to other companies,
and it believes it has other winners in the pipeline, such as its treatment for
prostate cancer using a gene therapy technique.

   Shares, which dived last week, today rose a fraction, by 0.25p to 25.75p.

LOAD-DATE: January 13, 2005


                             563 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2004 Manchester Evening News
                            Manchester Evening News

                                January 21, 2004

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 344 words

HEADLINE: Bitoech firm in appeal to investors

BYLINE: patricia roberts

BODY:



   SHARES in Warrington-based biotech firm ML Laboratories dived today as it
appealed to investors to keep it afloat. The company, which is behind the
development of new treatments for cancer and HIV, has aimed to become a major
drugs company focused on new treatments for a range of serious diseases.

   But its ambitions have suffered a blow with the admission that it just does
not have the cash to fund its existing plans. Today as it urged investors to
stand by the company, shares slumped by 4.75p to 29p.

   It has been relying on short-term "milestone" income from its developments to
fund future research, but has been hit by delays in that cash coming in.
Turnover in the six months to March 31 last year was £4.4m, down from £9.2m for
the same period a year earlier. Operating losses were £900,000 and there was no
interim dividend.

   Dashed

   Last year ML raised more than £13.5m when it sold off some of its interests,
including a manufacturing operation in Liverpool and most of its stake in
AIM-listed Cobra Biomanufacturing. Hopes that it would have enough working
capital to carry on its R&D programme have been dashed, and now the company says
it is looking at ways of raising extra cash including a potential equity
fundraising, and is urging shareholders to stick with it. "The company has
concluded it would be in the best interests of shareholders to continue to
pursue its current development plans rather than to curtail development
expenditure," it said in a trading update. "It has also taken into consideration
the views of several institutional investors which it met during October 2003,
and which expressed the view that it should consider raising funds to provide
additional comfort on working capital."

   Last November, it announced trials of a pioneering treatment for prostate
cancer - the commonest cancer in men in the UK. The new technique which uses
gene therapy to deliver a cancer-killing toxin direct to the tumour site, could
bring hope to millions and if successful might prove an eventual money-spinner.

LOAD-DATE: January 13, 2005


                             573 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2003 Manchester Evening News
                            Manchester Evening News

                               November 11, 2003

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 381 words

HEADLINE: Milestone in prostate cancer treatment

BODY:



    TRIALS of a pioneering treatment for prostate cancer, developed by a
Warrington drugs company, could bring hope to millions of men around the globe.
Prostate cancer is the commonest cancer in men, with 24,700 new cases a year in
the UK alone and the risk of being diagnosed with the disease is one in 14.

   The new technique has been developed by ML Laboratories which uses gene
therapy to deliver a cancer-killing toxin direct to the tumour site, in two
stages. To begin with, prostate tumours are injected with a harmless virus
containing the ntr gene.

   Once inside the cancer cell, this gene produces a substance known as a
protein enzyme. The second stage is to inject the patient intravenously with a
non-toxic chemical which is converted in the tumour by the enzyme into the
active drug that kills the cancer cells, whilst leaving other cells unaffected.

   The aim of the Phase II study is show that the treatment is safe - and that
it works. Its success can be measured by a blood test, and the outcome of the
trials is expected in the first half of 2005.

   Safe and effective

   The previous phase of the trial, involving 15 patients, was carried out
hospitals in Birmingham and Newcastle. Nicholas James, Professor of Oncology at
the University of Birmingham, who is leading the study, said: "We have reached
an important milestone in the early phase of this trial and are delighted to be
leading the field of gene therapy in prostate cander studies in the UK. "We have
shown that the injection of viruses into prostate turmours is a safe and
effective way to target cancer cells.

    "Our discovery that the enzyme produced may then facilitate the killing of
these cells has positive and wide-ranging implications. This study may lead to a
real treatment." ML's group director of research and development, Professor
Donald Davies, said the company was encouraged by results of the trials to date.
He said: "We are hopeful this new approach will deliver an innovative treatment
for prostate cancer sufferers."

   ML is a pharmceutical development company with a track record of successful
products. New ones in the pipeline include cancer treatments, a pain management
compound, and a preventative treatment for sexually transmitted infections,
including HIV.

LOAD-DATE: January 1, 2004


                             650 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2003 Manchester Evening News
                            Manchester Evening News

                                 March 24, 2003

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 231 words

HEADLINE: ML Laboratories plans £6.5m sell-off

BYLINE: by patricia roberts

BODY:



   ML Laboratories, the Warrington-based bio-technology firm is to sell one of
its manufacturing businesses to Baxter Healthcare, for £6.5m, as part of its bid
to get back into the black. In January, the company announced it was abandoning
some of its gene therapy research under plans to streamline the business which
had a seen pre-tax losses rise from £4m to £5.3m.

   Last June it disposed of its DNA manufacturing business. Now, subject to
shareholder approval, it is to sell off its Liverpool plant which makes
Icodextrin, a key ingredient in a number of its products.

   The sale is expected to net £5.5m and is vital to give the company sufficient
working capital. The group is expecting significant income from the
commercialisation of its products, but because of the need for regulatory
approval, and the signing of agreements with third parties, it is not possible
to guarantee this, it says.

   ML does not have any significant borrowings and does not have sufficient
tangible assets on which to secure borrowing facilities. However, with this
sale, and provided the income it expects from developments comes in on time, it
will have sufficient working capital for its present needs, it says.

   Chairman Stuart Sim said: "This disposal is a further significant step in the
repositioning of ML as a focused bio-pharmaceutical product development
company."

LOAD-DATE: January 1, 2004


                             666 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2003 Manchester Evening News
                            Manchester Evening News

                                January 28, 2003

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 187 words

HEADLINE: MLL cuts its cloth

BYLINE: By patricia roberts

BODY:



   WARRINGTON-based bio-technology firm ML Laboratories is abandoning some of
its gene therapy research in a bid to get back into the black. Last October, its
chairman Kevin Leech, once one of Britain's richest men, who owns a 39.5 per
cent stake, resigned as part of its re-structuring, but the company denied this
had anything to do with him being made bankrupt in Jersey.

   Over the last year, the company has streamlined and re-focused the business,
into just two operating divisions, off-loading some of its non-core
developments. But full-year results out today showed its pre-tax loss of £5.3m
was up on last year's pre-tax loss of £4m. Total turnover in the year was
£13.2m, comparied with £9.3m last year, as a result of licence agreements
income. New chairman Dr Stuart Sim, said the company's re-focusing plans were
well on track.  He said it has plans to off-load further developments unlikely
to produce revenue in the short term, and concentrate on those which could be
very lucrative - for example a new pain-killer it is trialling, which has a
potential global market of £750m.


LOAD-DATE: January 1, 2004


                             723 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2002 Express Newspapers
                                   Daily Star

                                 April 4, 2002

SECTION: LEADER; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 518 words

HEADLINE: LEADER: 'BUBBLE BOY' RHYS CURED; ON TOT OF THE WORLD

BYLINE: by NEIL CHANDLER

BODY:

    A BRITISH "bubble boy" has been cured thanks to a medical breakthrough.

    Little 18-month-old Rhys Evans, pictured right, could only survive in a
super-clinical room because he was born with no immune system.

    That meant he could not go outside, play, or meet pals.

    But groundbreaking gene therapy pioneered at Great Ormond Street Children's
Hospital has made him a normal tot again.

    It is the first time British medics have successfully corrected the gene
defect which causes Rhys's syndrome, Severe Combined Immunodeficiency Disorder
(SCID).

    Rhys's parents, from Cardiff, told how their despair turned to joy.

    Mark Evans, 40, who gave up his job with a gas company to care for Rhys and
cope with his own depression, said: "We're over the moon and proud to have our
son back.

    "He was skin and bone, too weak to hold his head up. Now there's no stopping
him."

    In a thank-you video his parents sent to doctors, the lively youngster
rushes around a Christmas tree, unable to stay still.

    His wife Marie, 31, said they were "devastated" when they learned of their
son's condition.

    Before his treatment, friends and family could only see Rhys under strict
supervision.

    Mrs Evans, a teacher, said: "Now we live at home like a normal family. He's
been to the park to play in the sand and get into mischief - we never thought
that would happen."

    The delighted parents revealed they had to take an agonising choice to try
to cure their son.

    A matched donor had been found in the US - but instead they decided to try
the radical new method on offer at Great Ormond Street.

    Experts believe controversial stem cell research - recently allowed in
Britain but still frowned on in the US - will provide similar cures for many
more diseases.

    Normally children like Rhys have bone marrow transplants from relatives -
but an exact match can only be found in a third of cases.

    So docs fixed the problem by extracting Rhys's marrow and infecting it with
a virus carrying the correct gene. It generated the immune cells to fight
disease which he lacks when it was put back into his body.

    Rhys had been sick since losing the immunity effect he inherited from his
mum.

    Antibiotics failed to clear up recurring chest infections and he was
admitted to hospital with pneumonia. He ended up on a ventilator in an intensive
care unit.

    Without treatment, a baby born with SCID faces death within the first couple
of years.

    The hospital's Dr Adrian Thrasher said: "We've been working in gene therapy
for many years in the lab and it's great to take that work into the clinic and
see some therapeutic success. Rhys is one of the first patients in the world to
see some therapeutic success from gene therapy."

    He said he was convinced the same technique would be applied to other blood
diseases, such as sickle cell anaemia in five to 10 years.

    The new "Jeans for Genes" laboratory at Great Ormond Street opened last
year.

    The charity has raised more than GBP 12 million for research since its 1996
launch and organisers hope to raise GBP 2.5 million this year.

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 2002


                             724 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2002 Express Newspapers
                                   Daily Star

                                 April 4, 2002

SECTION: LEADER; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 92 words

HEADLINE: DAILY STAR SAYS; MIRACLES ON THE CHEAP

BODY:

    WE Brits don't trumpet our triumphs loudly enough.

    It's time to reverse the trend.

    Yesterday Great Ormond Street Hospital announced how new gene therapy has
saved the life of little Rhys Evans - reported on this page.

    It's groundbreaking work in which Britain leads the world.

    This is the first of many huge leaps in medicine that genetic advances will
bring.

    A huge pat on the back for the doctors.

    But why should this brilliant group have to rely on charity handouts?

    In Britain, even genius has to make do on the cheap.

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 2002


                             728 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2002 Manchester Evening News
                            Manchester Evening News

                                 April 4, 2002

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 352 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy team seeks patient trials

BODY:



   SCIENTISTS in Manchester are on the brink of a major breakthrough in the
treatment of cancer it has been revealed.

   During a visit to the city's Paterson Institute, the Duke of Gloucester was
told pioneering gene therapy work by scientists in Manchester is on the verge of
increasing the survival chances of patients.  The Duke, in his role as Joint
Honorary President of Cancer Research UK, was visiting the scientific arm of the
Christie hospital.  The Duke met Dr Lez Fairbairn, head of gene therapy at the
Paterson, who explained that permission was being sought for patient trail to
measure the success of a new treatment.  Dr Fairbairn's team has developed two
novel approaches to cancer treatment.  The first aims to augment current
chemotherapy approaches.  Dr Fairbairn says: "Chemotherapy is very good at
killing tumour cells, but also kills normal cells.

    "This can mean that the amount of chemotherapy that can be given is limited
and this leads to insufficient tumour kill.  "We now plan to use gene therapy to
make normal bone marrow cells resistant to anti-tumour drugs.

    "We have managed to show in the laboratory that we can protect bone marrow
cells from a number of different chemotherapy drugs and by doing this we can
maintain the function of the white blood cells while giving increased level of
drugs. We are currently applying for permission to test this approach in
patients and if successful this should allow us to treat tumours more
aggressively and increase the chances of achieving a cure.  "Our second approach
aims to harness the power of the immune system to achieve tumour kill
by-re-educating cells of the immune system to see tumour cells as 'foreign.'

    "In that way they may reject the tumour in much the same way that an
unmatched kidney or heart transplant would be rejected.' The Duke also visited
the medical oncology group and the molecular biology core facility, escorted by
Paterson assistant director of research, Professor Jenny Varley.  On his
arrival, The Duke was received by the Lord-Lieutenant of Greater Manchester,
Colonel John Timmins.

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 2002


                             750 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2002 Manchester Evening News
                            Manchester Evening News

                                January 31, 2002

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 295 words

HEADLINE: Hope that brush with a painter will pay off

BYLINE: JAMES McNAMARA

BODY:



    A RENOWNED artist is using his talent to help save the life of a little
girl.  Geoff Butterworth, from Rochdale, is to auction a watercolour to help
send six-year-old Robyn Brooks to America for pioneering medical treatment.
Robyn was diagnosed with a rare cancer which affects her nerve tissue -
neuroblastoma - when she was only three.  Since then Robyn has battled with the
condition, but suffered a relapse on New Year's Eve.  Her mum and dad have
campaigned tirelessly and already raised GBP 100,000 to send Robyn to a
trail-blazing clinic in Texas.  But the family, who live in Whitworth Road, say
they need at least a further GBP 150,000 if Robyn is to survive the year.
      Her plight has touched the heart of artist Geoff, who has agreed to start
work immediately on a scene of Rochdale town centre.      He will then pass the
canvas to the highest bidder. Geoff said: I hope my good reputation will ensure
my picture fetches a good price and offer Robyn a chance for the future.
     It's only a small part of the campaign, but every donation helps.''
         Mum Karen said: We are so grateful to Geoff. We can't thank him
enough.
           We only hope this kind act will encourage others to help our
daughter.''
         Karen and husband Gary are prepared to give up their jobs and move to
the US for the treatment which could take up to 12 months.
         There are three possible treatments: A bone marrow transplant with low
dose chemotherapy, a vaccine or gene therapy.
         Robyn has an appeal fund at Barclays -  quote sort code 20-72-67 and
account number 60950432 or contact Mrs Brooks through PO Box 266, Rochdale.
         Robyn's website is www.robynbrooks.co.uk



GRAPHIC: Framed . . Geoff's picture will be sold to help Robyn Picture: HOWARD
WALKER

LOAD-DATE: January 31, 2002


                             752 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2002 Manchester Evening News
                            Manchester Evening News

                                January 29, 2002

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 257 words

HEADLINE: MLL disposals to fund cancer treatment

BYLINE: By Kevin Feddy

BODY:



   WARRINGTON-based biotechnology firm M L Laboratories today unveiled plans to
offload non-core development projects and technologies as it seeks to focus on
products to treat cancer.  Millionaire chairman Kevin Leech said the decision to
reposition the company followed a year-long strategic review. The business will
concentrate on gene therapy treatments for liver, head, neck and prostate
cancer.  Proceeds from any sell-offs will be used to accelerate developments in
the core therapeutic areas, said Mr Leech. Some product licences may be traded
for others.  Considerable progress is being made towards securing the disposal
by merger of Innovata Biomed, the subsidiary which develops inhalers for
respiratory illness such as asthma.  Mr Leech said: "Our activities will
continue to be supported by our existing growing income stream from products we
have successfully developed and licensed to other pharmaceutical companies which
include Baxter, Shire Pharmaceuticals and Celltech, and by the licence income we
anticipate will be generated by our Cobra technology."

    M L Laboratories, which has five products on the market, plans to offload
development of its Emmelle gel for women that could help prevent the spread of
AIDS. Meanwhile, Mr Leech said M L Laboratories has reached agreement in
principle with Paul Capital Royalty Acquisition Fund to provide GBP 5m towards
product development. In the year to September 30, M L Laboratories turned over
GBP 9.3m against GBP 11.9m previously. The pre-tax loss was GBP 4m.

LOAD-DATE: March 31, 2002


                             760 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 Manchester Evening News
                            Manchester Evening News

                               December 14, 2001

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 468 words

BODY:



    Construction boss to take over at Railtrack

   NEW bosses for Railtrack were announced today by the administrators who have
taken over running of the collapsed company.  Current chairman John Robinson and
current chief executive Steve Marshall have resigned from the Railtrack board
and the new chief executive will be John Armitt, 55, (right) former chief
executive of construction and engineering group Costain.

    Another new appointment is Jim Cornell, 62, who had 36 years of experience
with British Rail and becomes a non-executive director.

    Bare-faced cheek

   BOSSES at Sir Richard Branson's Virgin Mobile company were today branded
killjoys for scuppering plans to have photocopiers at their Christmas party so
staff could scan their bottoms. The idea was to recreate a TV advertisement for
the firm which features former All-Saint Melanie Blatt doing the same.

    BBC executive sacked A SENIOR BBC executive arrested in Hong Kong in
connection with an alleged GBP 1 million bribery ring involving Tweenies toys
has been sacked by the corporation. Jeff Taylor, BBC Worldwide's director of
global marketing and brand development, was dismissed on the grounds of
breaching employment policy on conflict of interests.


   Schools must do better STATE schools are getting better at educating clever
children, but have not yet mastered the art of spotting their most gifted and
talented pupils, education watchdog Ofsted said today. While more were providing
special activities including masterclasses'', they have to do better at
stretching these youngsters in everyday lessons, inspectors said.


   Plea to help the lonely THOUSANDS of volunteers are being recruited to
operate helplines for the Samaritans and Childline over Christmas as a new
survey today showed that many people will face the festive season feeling lonely
and alone. A poll of 500 adults disclosed that more than one in three -
especially women - suffered from loneliness.


   Sickle cell gene success SCIENTISTS believe that sickle cell disease could
potentially be eliminated in future with gene therapy. A new kind of gene
therapy treatment for the disease, which chiefly affects people of African
descent, has recently been successfully tested in the United States on mice.

    Elton gets lippy

   SIR Elton John is to advertise lipstick to raise funds for an Aids charity.
The rock star is to feature in advertisements for a lipstick which is sold in
aid of MAC Aids Fund.

    Cot death appeal

   BEREAVED parents are today calling for an urgent shake-up in the inadequate''
professional response to cot deaths. Parents can often be left totally
unsupported and vital information as to why an apparently healthy baby died can
be lost, the Foundation for the Study of Infant Deaths (FSID) said.


LOAD-DATE: December 15, 2001


                             772 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2001 Express Newspapers
                                   Daily Star

                               September 28, 2001

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 27

LENGTH: 373 words

HEADLINE: GET INTO DANI'S JEANS

BYLINE: by DEBBIE POGUE

BODY:

    SEXY Dani Behr is offering fans the chance to get into her jeans - for
charity.

    Dani, the new face of the BBC's Saturday Show, is one of dozens of celebs
taking part in this year's Jeans for Genes campaign - aiming to raise GBP
2.5million for sick children.

    She has created a signed glitzy denim patch emblazoned with "Glam Rock" and
decorated with pearls, safety pins and ribbons, to be auctioned.

    Appeal organisers have been flooded with customised patches from stars,
including Oasis badboy Liam Gallagher.

    They want people to bid online for them at www. qxl. com/jeansforgenes until
midnight tonight.

    Proving he has turned all mushy since All Saints girlfriend Nicole Appleton
gave birth to their baby son Gene, Liam is giving the appeal his backing.

    The singer - who famously declared:

    "I've called my boy Gene because you'll always see me in denims" - and
Nicole have also donated a signed T-shirt.

    Three patches from the Gallagher/Appleton household show Mod targets -
Liam's is a traditional red, white and blue target in leather stuck to the patch
and signed on the back "Live for ever, Love Liam". Nicole's is a brown and cream
cord target, while baby Gene's is a cute baby on a fur patch.

    Other stars including Kylie Minogue, Tamzin Outhwaite, Joanna Lumley, Fatboy
Slim and Zoe Ball have shown off their flair by customising a patch.

    Top of the Pops presenter Gail Porter, just married to Toploader star Dan
Hipgrave, signed hers in pink "Married Girl" with her new name - Gail Hipgrave.

    Thousands of people around the country will be wearing jeans to work or
school on Jeans for Genes Day - Friday, October 5 - donating GBP 1 to the
appeal.

    The cash will go to five children's charities led by the Great Ormond Street
Hospital Children's Charity.

    The money raised will help fund research into serious and life-threatening
genetic disorders which affect one baby in every 30 born in the UK.

    They hope to find gene therapy cures for 4,000 recognised genetic disorders
and help pay for valuable advice and support services for stricken families.

    Fund-raising packs can be ordered through the hotline 0800 980 4800 or by
going to the internet website www. jeansforgenes. com

LOAD-DATE: September 28, 2001


                             773 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 Manchester Evening News
                            Manchester Evening News

                               September 27, 2001

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 338 words

HEADLINE: Cash-share deal ends row

BYLINE: HELEN TITHER

BODY:



    MANCUNIAN millionaire Kevin Leech today settled a long-running legal battle
with the widow of the scientist that helped him launch Warrington biotech firm
ML Laboratories, in a complex cash and share deal.

    Entrepreneur Mr Leech has agreed to increase his stake in ML's holding
company, Milner Laboratories, from 68 per cent to 86 per cent - reducing widow
Ellen Milner's stake from 32 per cent to 14 per cent.  The settlement is the
result of a dispute which saw Mrs Milner - the 74-year-old widow of Jeremiah
Milner - claim in a case that went to court in Jersey that Mr Leech was
mismanaging assets in Milner and was loaned GBP 57m on uncommercial terms. She
wanted the court to force Mr Leech to buy out her 32 per cent stake, which was
said to be worth around GBP 100m.

    In a statement to the stock exchange ML Laboratories said the dispute had
now been amicably resolved''.  Part of the deal will see Milner reduce its
holding in ML from 76.5m shares - 48.36 per cent - to 62.5m shares, or 39.51 per
cent. It will transfer the 14m shares - 8.85 per cent - to Mrs Milner's
investment holding company Diarmuid Investments. In return Diarmuid will become
a sleeping investor and agree to use those shares to vote in line with Milner.

    Milner intends to retain its 62.5m shares in ML for the forseeable future.
Previous to the settlement ML had lost two thirds of its value this year, partly
due to fears that Mr Leech - one of Britain's most successful entrepreneurs -
would have to cut his stake in the biotechnology firm. It was originally
launched by Milner Laboratories, which was set up in 1983 by Mr Milner and Mr
Leech after the millionaire agreed to fund an invention that would revolutionise
kidney dialysis.  ML has four products on the market and recently began the UK's
first clinical trial of gene therapy for prostate cancer patients. It is also
working to produce a gel for women that could prevent the spread of AIDS. The
business has a market capitalisation of GBP 57.5m.


LOAD-DATE: September 27, 2001


                             775 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 Manchester Evening News
                            Manchester Evening News

                               September 26, 2001

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 435 words

HEADLINE: Give Robyn

BYLINE: PATRICIA ROBERTS

BODY:


    gift of life; Girl, 5, in website bid to raise cash for vital op in US


    A GIRL of five has launched her own website with a touching appeal to raise
money for a life-saving medical treatment.

    The site shows pictures of a smiling Robyn Brooks - who needs GBP 360,000 to
go to America.  Robyn's parents have turned down further NHS treatment for a
rare form of cancer believing a clinic in Texas gives greater hope of a cure.
Her website - www.robynbrooks.co.uk - carries a photo album of My Family''
featuring mum and dad, sister Elise and even a shot of her lorry driver dad's
truck.

    The site describes Robyn's illness and has a thank you'' page for all those
who have contributed money. More than GBP 25,000 has been raised so far.  Robyn,
from Rochdale, has a nerve tissue cancer.

    The treatment she hopes to receive in Houston is experimental and expensive,
but Karen and Gary Brooks, of Whitworth Road, say they have more confidence in
it.  And they have been convinced their decision is the right one after Gary met
two English boys already being treated there.

    Dad Gary said: If there was any doubt in my mind about going to America,
meeting them helped. They are responding well and that really boosts your
confidence.  I would never forgive myself if I didn't give Robyn that same
chance.'' Robyn was first diagnosed with neuroblastoma, an aggressive cancer
which afflicts young children, when she was three.

    After treatment at the Royal Manchester Children's Hospital, Pendlebury,
including nine months of chaemotherapy, the cancer was in remission for 18
months.  But then a tell-tale lump appeared on her cheek - the cancer had
returned.
   The couple say they have been told Robyn may have only 12 months to live and
that nothing available in Britain will cure her.
     Karen, an accountant, said: We know there are no guarantees  but they are
offering us hope, and what they are doing is very encouraging.''
    The couple are trying to raise the cash and preparing to give up their jobs
and move to the US for treatment, which could take 12 months.

 They need an initial GBP 100,000 to get treatment started and cover travel and
living expenses.
   There are three possible treatments: a bone marrow transplant with low dose
chaemotherapy, a vaccine or gene therapy.
    Robyn has an appeal fund at Barclays. If you would like to contribute,
quote sort code 20-72-67 and account number 609504432 or contact Mrs Brooks
through PO Box 266, Rochdale.
 Patricia.Roberts@gmnews.co.uk



GRAPHIC: HEARTBREAKER . . . cancer sufferer Robyn, five, needs to raise GBP
360,000

LOAD-DATE: September 26, 2001


                             845 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 Manchester Evening News
                            Manchester Evening News

                               February 12, 2001

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 271 words

HEADLINE: Era of hope as hospital leads revolution

BODY:





    THE massive cash donations to Christie Hospital are helping usher in a new
era in cancer treatment.

    Research at the Christie and other centres is allowing cancer medicine to
change dramatically. It will be revolutionised within the next 20 years, a
conference in Manchester was hearing today.  The days of one-size-fits-all''
cancer treatments are coming to an end, the Director General of the Cancer
Research Campaign told the charity's first national cancer symposium which is
being held in the city.

    Prof Gordon McVie says new chemotherapy drugs will do away with many of the
side-effects of treatment such as hair loss and sickness.  Researchers are just
beginning to develop new ways of tackling the disease that will dramatically
improve the lives of thousands of cancer patients in the next 20 years,'' he
said.

    Experts say cancers are as different from one another as patients are.  But
trials of new treatments are starting to take some of the genetic differences
between people's cancers into account, which will mean a better quality of life
for the patient and improved chances of survival.
    And CRC funded researchers are at the forefront of making this happen, said
Prof McVie.   Many of them working on world-beating research are based in
Manchester.
    Retired Manchester University lecturer Bill Newton is a cancer patient
guinea-pig'', undergoing pioneering gene-therapy treatment at Christie.
    Bill, who lives near Chorley, will have six injections over a couple of
months, and so far has suffered no adverse reaction.



LOAD-DATE: May 11, 2001


                             856 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 Manchester Evening News
                            Manchester Evening News

                                January 23, 2001

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 155 words

HEADLINE: Down's Syndrome cancer clue

BODY:



   VICTIMS of Down's Syndrome may hold a vital new weapon against lung cancer in
their genes, scientists said today.  Researchers found that people with the
genetic disorder, which affects about one in 600 newborn babies, have an extra
copy of a gene that appears to protect against lung cancer.

    In most people, genes come in pairs, but Down's sufferers have three copies
of the newly identified gene, called USP25.  The same gene is often missing
altogether from the tumour cells of people with lung cancer.

    Scientists believe the discovery may help them develop new drugs or gene
therapies that can fight or prevent the disease, which affects about 40,000
people a year in the UK.  A team from the Cancer Research Campaign charity made
the connection after noticing that people with Down's Syndrome were much less
likely than the rest of the population to develop common cancers, including lung
cancer.


LOAD-DATE: May 11, 2001


                             861 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 Manchester Evening News
                            Manchester Evening News

                                January 18, 2001

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 233 words

HEADLINE: Anti-AIDS drug to be tested in Africa

BYLINE: CHRIS BARRY

BODY:



   NORTH-west biotechnology company M L Laboratories is stepping up clinical
trials of its ground-breaking anti-AIDS drug Emmelle, it emerged today.  The
Warrington company, which has already carried out safety tests in the UK and
Belgium on its intra-vaginal gel, is to concentrate on HIV positive populations
in two centres in Africa.

    Emmelle contains an active ingredient called dextrin sulphate which acts as
a barrier to the HIV virus.

    Chief executive Stuart Sim said: Emmelle means a woman can protect herself
if a man does not bother to use a condom, or if there's a problem with the
condom.  The scale of the AIDS problem in Africa meant the drug was always going
to be trialled there.''

    The European Commission and Medical Research Council are helping to fund the
research.  Surveys have forecast sales of around GBP 700m a year for a product
like Emmelle.

    On the corporate side, ML has appointed merchant bank N M Rothschild to help
it look at ways of boosting its share price.  We feel we are seriously
undervalued,'' said Mr Sim.  ML has arranged a un-secured debenture facility
allowing it to raise GBP 12m should it need to.

    Losses in the year to September 30, 2000 - partly because of the acquisition
of gene therapy company Cobra Therapeutics - rose from GBP 6.9m to GBP 11.8.
Turnover rose from GBP 9.5m to GBP 11.9m.  No dividend.


LOAD-DATE: May 11, 2001


                             866 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2000 Manchester Evening News
                            Manchester Evening News

                               December 21, 2000

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 388 words

HEADLINE: Hopes raised over incurable' cancer

BYLINE: PATRICIA ROBERTS

BODY:


    A NEW vaccine which could bring hope to thousands of sufferers from a cancer
for which there is yet no cure, is being tested on patients at Manchester's
Christie Hospital.

    At present victims of a type of cancer which attacks the body's immune
system can hope only to keep the disease at bay for a while with chemotherapy.
But this treatment will not cure the cancer, which almost always returns
afterwards.

    It also has extremely unpleasant side-effects, and repeated sessions make it
harder and harder for the patient to withstand.  Now patients in a special trial
- the first of its kind at the pioneering Manchester cancer centre - are being
given a genetically-engineered vaccine.

    This triggers the body's own defences into fighting the cancer - one
involving the lymphatic system, which keeps the immune system healthy.  The
study is spearheaded by internationally-renowned gene therapy trail-blazer Prof
Robert Hawkins, the Christie's director of medical oncology.

    With his research team, he has developed the vaccine at the hospital's
Paterson Institute laboratories, in collaboration with scientists at Southampton
University.  Five patients from each centre who are taking part in the trials
all have a form of the disease known as low-grade lymphoma, which strikes 3,000
people a year in Britain.  Our hope for the vaccine is at least a much longer
life extension and at best a cure,'' said Prof Hawkins.
  Because it may help the body's immune system fight the cancer, there
shouldn't be any side-effects and it would therefore be a much kinder
treatment.''    All the guinea pigs'' have had one session of chemotherapy. It
is hoped that the vaccine, which is tailor-made for each patient, will trigger
the body's immune system into destroying any remaining tumour cells.
    The patients will have six vaccinations over four months.
    One way tumours hide the body's defence system is by making a protein which
disguises the cancer cells.
     The vaccine includes genes taken from this protein.

 It is injected into a muscle well away from the tumour, triggering the immune
system into destroying the copy'' protein.
The aim is to teach the immune system to recognise the cancer protein whenever
it occurs, and destroy it.


LOAD-DATE: May 11, 2001


                             891 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2000 Manchester Evening News
                            Manchester Evening News

                                October 3, 2000

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 226 words

BODY:



    OM upbeat as vote nears on LSE bid

   OM Group, the Swedish group bidding to take control of the London Stock
Exchange, today said it had extended its GBP 820m offer to October 23 and had
made good progress'' in winning support.  The first closing date for the offer
was 3pm yesterday, by which time OM said it had received valid acceptances in
respect of 300,000 LSE shares, or one per cent of the issued capital of the
London exchange. The LSE is to hold a meeting on October 19 to decide on the
exchange's 4.9 per cent shareholding limit.


   Windfall bonanza SCOTTISH Life members will collect windfalls of around GBP
4,000 after it agreed to be taken over rival Royal London in a deal struck late
yesterday. The deal creates a group with a premium income of GBP 1.9bn.


   GBP 1m signing NORTH west biotechnology company ML Laboratories has signed a
deal which will give it an instant GBP 1m and further milestone payments. Its
gene therapy unit Cobra has agreed to develop and commercialise its applications
used to produce antibodies with US-based Coulter Pharmaceuticals.


   Yesterday's close: 1119.23, up 1.62.

   Today: (10am) 1120.47.
     Today's pointers

 FT All-Share Index: 3026.39$ L Gold: $272.45         Silver:$4.88
 Platinum: $ 566.00-$ 574.00$ L
Base Rate: 6.00 per cent
(Feb 10, 2000)


LOAD-DATE: May 11, 2001


                             896 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2000 Manchester Evening News
                            Manchester Evening News

                               September 7, 2000

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 33

LENGTH: 240 words

HEADLINE: Christie welcomes crucial' cancer funding

BYLINE: TANIA BRANIGAN

BODY:



    A LEADING Manchester prostate cancer specialist has welcomed government
plans to boost research spending by GBP 4bn.

    Dr John Logue, of the Christie Hospital, said the cash was long overdue and
would prove crucial in fighting the disease, which kills three men in the north
west each day. He said: Prostate cancer research is an area that's very much
underfunded compared to other cancers. It's a Cinderella' disease, especially
compared to breast cancer.

    So our ability to get funding for studies we had in mind has been thwarted
in the past. We hope this money will allow us to carry out more trials to help
develop treatments.'' The extra cash, announced yesterday by Health Secretary
Alan Milburn, amounts to a 20-fold increase in funding.

    But Dr Logue warned: It's not a huge amount of money compared to the amount
spent on, say, breast cancer research.  It's not exactly a drop in the ocean and
we hope it makes a major contribution to treating people. But we will need a lot
of other funding in future.''

    He added: Prostate cancer is often regarded as a disease of elderly men and
is falsely seen as one that men die with, not of.  But some 11,000 men die
annually as a result of it. That's about 30 men a day - three men a day in the
north west alone. It's also a disease which is becoming more common.''

    The Christie is researching gene therapy and improved radiotherapy.


LOAD-DATE: May 11, 2001


                             921 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2000 Manchester Evening News
                            Manchester Evening News

                                 June 27, 2000

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 247 words

HEADLINE: Chest virus that holds hope for cancer patients

BYLINE: DEBORAH HAILE

BODY:



    A GERM that causes chest infections may soon be used to treat brain cancers.

    Scientists from Manchester University believe they may have found a way to
modify the make-up of the common virus to try to combat cancers..  Husband and
wife team, Prof Pedro Lowenstein and Prof Maria Castro are at the forefront of
research into gene therapy to treat brain cancers.

    And now they claim they have modified the adenovirus - a type of germ that
causes chest infections - so that it can be used to release anti-cancer drugs
into the tumour with relative safety.  Last year they warned that cancer
patients who are treated with gene therapy could face long-term side-effects,
such as swelling of the brain.

    But now they have modified the adenovirus - which carries the drugs to the
affected areas - to make it safer.  They could be running clinical trials on
patients within five years.  This is a virus we have been working on for a long
time,'' said Prof Lowenstein, who is based at Manchester University.  We have
disabled the virus so that it is not toxic and we have inserted the therapeutic
genes into the virus that act as the drug.''

    When the modified virus was injected into rats with tumours the cancers,
they say, appeared to regress and the virus did not provoke dangerous reactions
from the immune system.  According to Prof Lowenstein, success in the research
would be measured by prolonging life rather than curing cancer.



LOAD-DATE: May 11, 2001


                             931 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2000 Manchester Evening News
                            Manchester Evening News

                                 June 22, 2000

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 124 words

HEADLINE: Cancer treatment trials significant milestone'

BODY:



   WARRINGTON biotechnology group M L Laboratories today announced that it had
started clinical trials of a unique gene therapy cancer treatment. Cobra
Therapeutics, the gene technology operation ML bought earlier this year, will
recruit up to 30 liver-cancer patients over the next year and begin phase II
trials which could lead to registration of the treatment.
   A gene introduced into cancer cells produces and enzyme which turns a
separately-injected harmless chemical into a highly active cancer-killing
agent.
    The company has also been given regulatory approval for trials of treatment
for head and neck cancers. ML chief executive Stuart Sim said the trials were a
significant milestone''.



LOAD-DATE: May 11, 2001


                             951 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2000 Manchester Evening News
                            Manchester Evening News

                                 March 18, 2000

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 354 words

BODY:



    Canal holiday firm sinks into the red

   TOUGH trading conditions in the UK holiday market saw sales go adrift at
Anglo-Welsh's core canal boats business, the company said today.  Group turnover
for the year to October 31 came in flat at GBP 3.1m but pre-tax profits in 1998
of GBP 404,761 sank to a GBP 4.2m loss last year, hurt by higher interest
charges and operating expenses. However chairman David Court said advance
holiday bookings for this year were substantially ahead of the same period last
year. Shareholders in the Bristol-based group will pick up a reduced total
dividend of 0.5p, against 3p last time.

    Lastminute deal

   ONLINE travel shopping company Lastminute.com, which floated on the stock
market earlier this week, is to provide its travel and shopping service to cable
company NTL. The online company will provide a range of holiday, flight and
hotel deals over NTL's interactive digital TV services.

   NatWest FD to go ROYAL Bank of Scotland made its first major announcement
since its late February takeover of National Westminster Bank, saying NatWest
finance director Richard Delbridge would resign on April 30. Delbridge will be
replaced by RBS finance and risk director Grahame Whitehead, who will become
chief financial officer for the combined RBS-NatWest group.


   Bizzbuild buzzes NICHE investor Durlacher said Bizzbuild.com, the first
flotation from its online trading service Nothing-Ventured, was 11 times
oversubscribed in its retail offer.  Bizzbuild, founded by two former senior
executives of British Telecommunications, is an e-commerce development and
management group and owns 54 per cent of Value-Direct, one of the most popular
retailers of electrical goods in the UK.


   ML gets boost SHARES in M.L. Laboratories rose yesterday after the
biotechnology group said that dexemel, its intraperitoneal drug delivery system,
provided significant'' benefits when used to deliver certain gene therapy
products. It also said that, following marketing approval for dexemel in the UK
in January last year, it has been given European marketing approval.



LOAD-DATE: May 11, 2001


                             989 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2008 The Financial Times Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved

                                     FT.com

                        14 March 2008 Friday 9:32 PM GMT

LENGTH: 635 words

HEADLINE: US bank's rescue weighs down FTSE

BYLINE: Robert Orr and Neil Hume

BODY:

   Bid talk helped Shire top the list of blue-chip gainers as stunned dealers
digested news that the US bank Bear Stearns needed emergency funding.

   The UK's third-largest pharmaceuticals group rose to a session high of
GBP10.35 amid rumours that Pfizer of the  US was lining up a GBP13-a-share
offer.

   Analysts said Pfizer may be attracted by Shire's attention deficit disorder
drug Vyvanse, the successor to Adderall XR, and its pipeline of human genetic
therapies. Some believe Pfizer is keen to build its portfolio of drugs ahead of
the expected loss of $12bn of sales when its cholesterol drug Lipitor goes
off-patent.

   Sources close to Shire played down the rumours. Although the stock eased as
the session wore on, analysts said bid interest was likely to persist.

   "With larger industry players such as Pfizer facing a significant sales gap
in the next few years . . . we see bid speculation surrounding the mid-cap
companies as likely to continue," wrote Cazenove. Shire closed up 5 per cent at
990p.

   The FTSE 100 touched a session high of 5,782 just after the shock news of
problems at Bear Stearns that ended up dragging indices on both sides of the
Atlantic sharply lower. The UK benchmark closed down 1.1 per cent, or 60.7
points, at 5,631.7. The FTSE 250 lost 1 per cent, or 95.4 points, to 9,706.1.
After a fall of 1.2 per cent over the week, the FTSE 100 is just 50 points above
its January low for the year.

   Weighed down by the Bear Stearns news and a sharp uptick in the three-month
interbank lending rate for sterling, banks led the fallers. HBOS lost 6.1 per
cent to 528p, Barclays fell 3.9 per cent to 433p and Alliance & Leicester dipped
3.7 per cent to 512lp. Other financials joined the slide, with inter-dealer
broker Icap off 5.7 per cent to 598p  and London Stock Exchange down 3.6 per
cent to GBP12.32 - below the level at which the Nasdaq stock exchange pitched
its GBP12.43-a-share takeover offer.

   Prudential lost 4.9 per cent to 622p as Mark Tucker, chief executive,
appeared to rule out a spin-off of the life assurer's fast-growing Asian
operation.

   The day's other big casualties were the supermarkets as Goldman Sachs became
the latest investment bank to turn  negative on the sector. In a review of
supermarkets across Europe, Goldman said food price inflation would hit margins,
while volumes were also likely to decline.

   Goldman slashed Tesco to "sell", removed J Sainsbury from its "conviction
buy" list and downgraded Wm Morrison from "buy" to "neutral".

   The last was further hit by news that Sir Ken Morrison, outgoing chairman,
may sell some of his family's 16 per  cent holding ahead of changes to capital
gains tax rules. Sainsbury fell 3.9 per cent to 326p, Morrison dropped 3.9 per
cent to 278lp and Tesco slid 3.4 per cent to 380p.

   Mining stocks moved higher as Lehman Brothers raised its metals forecasts and
said the sector was "well positioned to outperform the market over the next 12
months". Lehman said its top mining picks remained BHP Billiton and Rio Tinto,
which rose 3.6 per cent to GBP15.90 and 2.2 per cent to GBP55.27 respectively.

   Following its figures earlier in the week, Tullow Oil gained 3.8 per cent to
653lp as its management met analysts and investors to explain its exploration
and development programme in Ghana and Uganda.

   International Power rose 3 per cent to 393p as Deutsche Bank raised its
stance on the power group to "buy".

   "International Power owns a diverse collection of power station assets around
the world and has a significant number of development and acquisition
opportunities. With increasing tightness in electricity markets and soaring
equipment costs, this portfolio should be increasing in value," Deutsche said.

   Collins Stewart lost 6.9 per cent to 122p after the financial services group
said there was "no doubt 2008 will  be challenging".

LOAD-DATE: March 15, 2008


                             990 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2008 The Financial Times Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved

                                     FT.com

                     14 February 2008 Thursday 10:20 PM GMT

LENGTH: 353 words

HEADLINE: Aids vaccine 'no nearer'

BYLINE: Clive Cookson in Boston

BODY:

   The world is no closer to developing an Aids vaccine now than it was when HIV
was discovered, despite 25 years of intense scientific effort, one of the
world's leading authorities on the virus said on Thursday.

   But David Baltimore, president of the American Association for the
Advancement of Science, told the AAAS annual meeting in Boston that the
scientific world should not give up in despair at its failure.

   "Every year [since the early 1980s] I have been saying that an Aids vaccine
is at least 10 years away and I am still saying that today," said Prof
Baltimore, professor of biology at the California Institute of Technology. "Some
people are saying now that it will never happen but I want to take an optimistic
stance; this is too important to give up on."

   The challenge is so great because, unlike other viruses, HIV has evolved two
ways of resisting the human immune system. It avoids attack by the host's
antibodies and immune cells.

   The failure last year of the most ambitious clinical trial so far, an HIV
vaccine made by Merck of the US, "left the [scientific] community depressed
because we see no hopeful route to success," said Prof Baltimore.

   His response, funded by the Gates Foundation, is to try a wholly new approach
- attacking HIV through a combination of gene therapy, immunologic therapy and
stem cell therapy that has never been tried before. Scientists hope to introduce
new HIV-fighting genes into blood stem cells.

   Preparatory work for the project at Caltech shows that "it is as difficult as
we imagined," said Prof Baltimore, who won a Nobel Prize for discovering the key
enzyme that HIV uses to reproduce. "We are still in the stage of developing the
tools, the systems and the materials we need to even attempt a serious test of
the idea."

   He compared the latest HIV vaccine project to a "Hail Mary pass" in American
football, a long throw forward made in desperation with little chance of
success. "To control HIV immunologically the scientific community has to  beat
out nature - do something that nature, with its advantage of 4bn years of
evolution, has not been able to do," he said.

LOAD-DATE: February 14, 2008


                             991 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2007 The Financial Times Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved

                                     FT.com

                      23 November 2007 Friday 3:19 PM GMT

LENGTH: 1760 words

HEADLINE: Lunch with the Craig Venter

BYLINE: Clive Cookson

BODY:

   Craig Venter, cartoon villain to some and scientific superhero to others, has
the most exciting CV in contemporary research. His 61 years have taken him from
Californian bad boy and beach bum, through the trauma of Vietnam war service, to
leadership in decoding the human genome and - most recently - making synthetic
microbes in his laboratory.

   Venter has a soft spot for the FT. He feels we were fair to him during the
bitter war of words in the late 1990s, when his company, Celera, was racing
against the public sector to decode all human DNA. Making him "Man of the Year
2000" didn't hurt either.

   So, on a short trip to London to launch his lively autobiography A Life
Decoded, Venter offered the FT his one available lunch slot. We choose
Cecconi's, a smart Italian restaurant close to Venter's hotel in Mayfair, to
maximise our time together.

   Venter arrives at 12.40pm, dropped off by two women, his London book
promoter, Annabel Huxley, and Heather Kowalski,  who does public relations for
Venter's research institute and is his fiancee. Kowalski normally insists on
sitting  in on all interviews, but today she has broken her own rule and allowed
Venter to lunch alone.

   The women leave strict instructions that we must be finished by 2pm when a
car will take Venter on to a BBC television interview. That may be difficult, he
observes quietly as we begin to read Cecconi's tempting menu. By the time a
waitress comes over to tell us about the day's specials, it is clear that we are
in for a three-course meal.

   The 6bn chemical letters of Venter's personal genome have been decoded and
analysed in greater detail than the DNA of anyone else in existence. The
analysis shows that Venter carries several genes that increase his risk of
developing heart disease and late-onset diabetes. But he has always been an
"omnivore", eating a healthy mixed diet with plenty of fish, and the genetic
analysis has made little difference. He orders a pasta starter, followed by
grilled halibut. I go for a series of three starters.

   "I do enjoy a drink even though there is a history of alcohol abuse in my
family," Venter says. He orders a glass of Pinot Grigio, and I drink a beer.

   In his book, Venter intersperses conventional autobiography with commentary
about his personal genome. What strikes me about the latter is how little useful
personal information it provides. Venter may have a more precise understanding
of his own genetic make-up than anyone else on earth, but his only specific
response has been to take fat-lowering statin drugs to reduce his susceptibility
to heart disease and, possibly, Alzheimer's disease. And, as he admits to me,
"you don't need to know your genetic code to decide to take statins". The Venter
family's medical history would have provided sufficient motivation: "My father
died at 59, a sudden cardiac death."

   This leads, as we eat our starters, to a discussion of the way scientists and
journalists have exaggerated the benefits and impact of new genetic knowledge.
He blames his competitors in the public human genome project, who were funded
mainly by the US government and Britain's Wellcome Trust.

   "The hype was unbelievable," he says. "The government guys were hyping the
human genome project more and more. If you look back through the documents, you
will not see me saying anything about it being the most important  research
project in the history of humanity or the Apollo project of biology. I said it
was only the race to the starting line. I tried to put it all into perspective
through analysing my own genome, to show that there is not much you can tell
now," Venter adds. "You cannot read the human genome right now."

   He dismisses the near-term prospects for gene therapy - replacing patients'
defective genes or giving them new genes to help fight a disease such as cancer
- and for personalised medicine, in which treatments are precisely matched  to
genetic make-up. "Gene therapy has almost no chance of working in the near
future," he says. "Personalised medicine has been equally hyped."

   Although he has been described as the alpha male of US science, Venter's
voice and modest body language show no  sign of his extremely competitive
character. The action is in his steel-grey eyes, which flash with a cold energy
as he  talks.

   Today's prosperous Venter with neatly trimmed beard and moustache - and
wearing an open-necked blue shirt under  a well-tailored navy blue suit - is
very different from the Venter who first visited London immediately after
discharge  from the US military. On his arrival at Heathrow airport the scruffy
21-year-old with backpack and sleeping bag suffered half a day of intensive
search and interrogation. Immigration officials were apparently convinced that
he had come to Britain either to import drugs or to foment opposition to the
Vietnam war.

   Anyone who talks to Venter and reads A Life Decoded may get the impression
that he is not very fond of the UK. As well as that unfortunate first visit, he
later faced what he regarded as particularly hostile coverage from the British
media. Venter feels that journalists here were unduly influenced by the Wellcome
Trust, whose scientists in Cambridge were responsible for one-third of the
public human genome project. (Of course, Wellcome researchers believe there was
an opposite bias in favour of Venter, the plucky underdog who challenged the
research establishment.)

   But as the main courses arrive, Venter protests his affection for Britain,
"the land of my ancestors". "I am not a hateful person, I am very forgiving," he
says. "But it was pretty bizarre for governments and charities to be attacking
me so openly. I am still baffled by the immaturity of their behaviour."

   One of Venter's best-known opponents during the 1990s was James Watson,
co-discoverer of the double helix structure of DNA, who had by chance arrived in
London at the same time as Venter to promote his own autobiography Avoid  Boring
People. By the time of our lunch, however, Watson had returned to the US in
disgrace after a newspaper quoted him making an apparently racist remark about
Africans, for which he later apologised.

   When I mention Watson, Venter is quick to condemn his remarks. "Skin colour
as a surrogate for race is a social  and not a scientific concept," he says.
"There is no basis in the human genetic code for the notion that colour will be
predictive of intelligence." But he adds: "I think Watson disagreed with
himself. I don't  think he believes what he was reported as saying."

   It is clear, however, that Venter has not forgiven Watson for turning him
into "the poster boy for the commercialisation of research" by talking
consistently about the "Venter patents" on newly discovered genes. "In Vietnam,
we talked about the 'gookification' of the enemy and Watson is a pro at that,"
he says. "He knew they were not my patents  They were my discoveries but not my
patents. It affects me to this day - people still talk about me commercialising
the common heritage of mankind."

   Service in Vietnam, Venter's "university of death", was a life-defining
experience for him. Working as a hospital corpsman in Da Nang, he saw horrific
pain, suffering and death on a daily basis. And he determined to go to a real
university after Vietnam, with a view to a career in medical research.

   Writing his autobiography - often during long-distance air travel - was
particularly cathartic when he got to the Vietnam period, he says: "I became
emotional at times. My fellow passengers must have wondered about the crazy guy
sitting next to them, with tears streaming down his cheeks."

   By now we are ready for desserts. It is coming up to 2pm but Venter is
determined to get an order in, though he settles modestly for a selection of
sorbets. We ask the waitress to bring the food as quickly as possible - and
fortunately it arrives just before two publicists return to take Venter away. He
tells them he wants to eat what is on his plate and finish with a cappuccino.
They agree to give us another 15 minutes.

   I feel that I should ask Venter about his project that is making headlines at
the moment: synthetic biology. The research involves making an artificial
chromosome from laboratory chemicals and inserting it into an empty cell, which
would then act like a real microbe. Scientists at his J. Craig Venter Institute
near Washington DC are "at least a  few weeks and probably months away" from
doing this.

   "The headlines may talk about creating life but in fact we are not really
creating life from scratch," he says. "We are just making the genetic code
chemically in the lab - making a copy of an existing chromosome. These are the
baby steps, but if they work the possibility of design is there." Venter is
particularly keen on designing  new micro-organisms that would be better than
their natural counterparts at producing bio-fuels and removing CO2 from the
atmosphere.

   "I regard the environment as the number one issue facing humanity," he says.
"There is no point in medical researchers coming up with new treatments for
cancer if we are not going to be around to use them."

   But Venter's scientific love remains the human genome rather than genetically
engineered microbes. His institute aims to sequence and analyse the genomes of
10,000 people over the next decade. "With that number we could get some serious
answers about nature and nurture," he says. "Scientifically, I'm much more
excited about doing 10,000 human genomes and answering basic questions about
humanity than I am about synthetic biology."

   Venter has a final controversial point to make with his last sips of coffee -
a plea for people to be open about their DNA. "It is an outdated view that
genetic studies have to be done secretly and anonymously," he says. "Secrecy is
the main thing that contributes to public fears about genetics. Despite my ups
and downs with Jim Watson, I applaud his decision to make his genome public this
year."

   Whether his motivation is egotism or altruism, Venter symbolises the
all-action scientist who is not afraid to engage with people on controversial
issues. As he is swept away to a television studio, I reflect that everyone
lamenting the lack of scientific interest and knowledge among the general public
- and schoolchildren in particular - should be grateful for his efforts.

   Clive Cookson is the FT's science editor

   Cecconi's, 5A Burlington Gardens, London W11 x Umbrian sausages1 x gratinated
scallops1 x artichoke ravioli1 x gnocchi1 x grilled halibut1 x sorbet1 x special
dessert1 x glass Pinot Grigio1 x Nastro beer2 x coffeesTotal: GBP89.80

LOAD-DATE: November 23, 2007


                             992 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2007 The Financial Times Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved

                                     FT.com

                         6 May 2007 Sunday 10:33 PM GMT

LENGTH: 524 words

HEADLINE: Universities drive biotech advancement

BYLINE: Clive Cookson in Boston

BODY:

   Universities and public research institutes, rather than companies, are
driving advances in biotechnology, according  to a worldwide patent analysis
released on Monday at the Bio conference in Boston. However, there is a global
disparity  in academic patenting activity, with the US and Japan well ahead of
Europe.

   The study by Marks & Clerk, the UK-based intellectual property firm, analysed
biotech patenting by universities,  public bodies and companies between 2002 and
2006. Gareth Williams, co-author of the report, expressed surprise at the
dominance of the academic sector; he was disappointed but less surprised by
Europe's poor performance in comparison with the US and Asia.

   The top three patenting organisations were the Japan Science and Technology
Agency with 1,022 biotech patent families  groups of patents associated with a
single invention  the University of California with 543, and the US government
with 443, mainly from the National Institutes of Health.

   The highest ranking company, Genentech of the US, appears at number four in
the table, with 421 patent families, and  Millennium Pharmaceuticals is sixth.
But the top 20 is dominated by American universities.

   All the most influential patents, in terms of the frequency with which they
are cited by other researchers, come from universities. By this measure the
champion institution is the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, which holds
alone or jointly with Harvard University  the three most cited patents.

   Oxford has the best patenting performance of any European university, with 65
patent families  less than half the number assigned to each of the universities
of Texas, Pennsylvania, Florida, Johns Hopkins, Stanford and Columbia in the US.

   "The academic performance from Europe reflects badly on its leading
institutions, which are still failing to translate their enormous skills base
into commercial reality," Dr Williams said. "Academic patents are very valuable
... as they cover fundamental technologies."

   Europe's corporate performance is slightly better. Novozymes of Denmark is
the highest ranking European company, with 162 patent families. The study
singles out Denmark as the outstanding European country for its biotech
patenting growth; Danish companies and universities have trebled their filings
from a total of 75 in 2002 to 225 in 2006. Last year Danish companies were the
third largest country group in the study, after the US and Japan.

   Over the five years covered by the study, the biotech sector  academic and
corporate  has become "much more mature and less speculative" in its patenting,
the report says.

   In 2002 patenting activity "included a high level of speculative,
sequence-based inventions related to genetic engineering. By 2006 this figure
falls by 78 per cent and the focus of research becomes much more concentrated."
Hot areas for patenting are now antibodies, gene therapy and stem cells.

   "This suggests that lessons have been learnt as to what is patentable and,
more importantly, commercially worthwhile," Dr Williams said. As a result of
this more focused activity, the global volume of biotech patenting has declined
since 2002.

LOAD-DATE: 6 May 2007


                             993 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2007 The Financial Times Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved

                                     FT.com

                      25 April 2007 Wednesday 9:39 AM GMT

LENGTH: 351 words

HEADLINE: MEPs divided over gene therapy rules

BYLINE: Andrew Bounds in Strasbourg

BODY:

   Lives  and millions of euros of corporate profits  were said to be hanging in
the balance as European Union lawmakers prepared to vote on Wednesday on whether
to allow a new generation of medicines based on controversial gene technologies.

   MEPs, who are deeply split over the proposals, will vote on two options for
European Union-wide regulation of so-called advanced therapies, one of which
would ban those derived from stem cells.

   Miroslav Mikolasik, the centre-right MEP who drafted the original report to
parliament that called for the ban, has been challenged by opponents who say his
ethical concerns are stifling innovation and are best left to national
governments.

   In a rare move, leftwing and centrist deputies have tabled counter-proposals.
Mr Mikolasik's own European people's party is split, with its Christian Democrat
component having reservations about the use of stem cells but  others backing
industry.

   The debate echoes one last year, when parliament narrowly approved the use of
EU funding for stem cell research but allowed member countries discretion over
whether to allow it on their soil. Catholic states such as Poland have banned
such research.

   Biotechnology companies said the US's competitive edge would grow if
legislation were delayed. Others said the dispute threatened lives by holding up
the introduction of new medicines.

   "We urge MEPs not to delay the adoption of this regulation," said the
European Organisation for Rare Diseases, a patients' lobbying group. It said
sufferers of diseases such as Parkinson's and muscular dystrophy were desperate
for new remedies.

   EuropaBio, which represents the biotechnology industry, called for the
immediate adoption of the centre-left proposals.

   "We have small companies across Europe spending millions on research into
these new medicines. If you were an investor would you continue to fund it if
there was no market opportunity? All eyes are on parliament today," said  Wills
Hughes-Wilson of EuropaBio.

   If Mr Mikolasik wins through he will have to begin fresh negotiations with
the European commission, which backs the centre-left approach.

LOAD-DATE: 25 April 2007


                             994 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2007 The Financial Times Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved

                                     FT.com

                       24 April 2007 Tuesday 6:41 PM GMT

LENGTH: 341 words

HEADLINE: MEPs divided over gene therapy rules

BYLINE: Andrew Bounds in Strasbourg

BODY:

   Lives  and millions of euros of corporate profits  were said to be hanging in
the balance Tuesday night as Europe's lawmakers split over plans to allow a new
generation of medicines based on controversial gene technologies.

   MEPs will vote Wednesday on two options for EU-wide regulation of so-called
advanced therapies, one of which would ban those derived from stem cells.

   Miroslav Mikolasik, the centre-right MEP who drafted the original report to
parliament that called for the ban, has been challenged by opponents who say his
ethical concerns are stifling innovation and are best left to national
governments.

   In a rare move, leftwing and centrist deputies have tabled counter-proposals.
Mr Mikolasik's own European people's party is split, with its Christian Democrat
component having reservations about the use of stem cells but  others backing
industry.

   The debate echoes one last year, when parliament narrowly approved the use of
EU funding for stem cell research but allowed member countries discretion over
whether to allow it on their soil. Catholic states such as Poland have banned
such research.

   Biotechnology companies said the US's competitive edge would grow if
legislation were delayed. Others said the dispute threatened lives by holding up
the introduction of new medicines.

   "We urge MEPs not to delay the adoption of this regulation," said the
European Organisation for Rare Diseases, a patients' lobbying group.It said
sufferers of diseases such as Parkinson's and muscular dystrophy  were desperate
for new remedies.

   EuropaBio, which represents the biotechnology industry, called for the
immediate adoption of the centre-left proposals.

   "We have small companies across Europe spending millions on research into
these new medicines. If you were an investor would you continue to fund it if
there was no market opportunity? All eyes are on parliament today," said  Wills
Hughes-Wilson of EuropaBio.

   If Mr Mikolasik wins through he will have to begin fresh negotiations with
the European commission, which backs the centre-left approach.

LOAD-DATE: 24 April 2007


                             995 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2007 The Financial Times Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved

                                     FT.com

                        30 March 2007 Friday 6:07 PM GMT

LENGTH: 835 words

HEADLINE: Shire embroiled in suit over TKT deal

BODY:

   Nearly two years after Shire, the speciality medicines group, bought
Transkaryotic Therapies, a US biotechnology company, controversy surrounding the
deal refuses to die down.

   Shire this week was slapped with another lawsuit by disgruntled investors in
TKT, which it bought for $1.6bn (then worth GBP838m) in April 2005.

   In August of that year, TKT shareholders, including Millenco, Porter Orlin
and Cede, sued TKT claiming the price of $37 a share paid by Shire was not
enough.

   They asked the Delaware State Court of Chancery to determine the "fair value"
of their investments in the company. That action is still pending.

   Now, a group of investors that includes US billionaire Carl Icahn and Viking
Global Equities, as well as Millenco and Porter Orlin, has accused Shire and TKT
of a "breach of fiduciary duty". According to court documents filed in Delaware
this week and obtained by the Investors Chronicle, the FT's sister publication,
the plaintiffs claim the TKT acquisition was not concluded after "vigorous and
competent" negotiations with Shire and with the aim of maximising investor
returns, but driven by the "personal" interests of certain TKT directors.

   'Side deal' alleged

   Specifically, they allege that Shire  including chief executive Matthew
Emmens  enticed Dennis Langer, a TKT director, to swap sides and vote for the
merger by offering him a "side deal".

   This deal, they claim, was that they would help him to acquire certain assets
from TKT  said to be worth $8m (GBP4.1m)  which would form part of a start-up
venture that he was backing.

   The plaintiffs allege, however, that Shire, having secured TKT, then reneged
on its promises to Langer.

   The lawsuit also claims that certain investment bankers colluded with the
alleged "wrongdoing" and that the plaintiffs have copies of the bankers' e-mails
that "display a cynicism and avarice wholly inconsistent with the trust reposed
in them".

   The plaintiffs claim that a sale of TKT was solicited by Jonathan Leff, a
director both of TKT and of private equity  house Warburg Pincus, initially
without the knowledge of certain directors, in order to "liquidate" the
institution's position in the company.

   They claim that the shares could have reached a higher price than Shire paid
for them because of forthcoming product  trial results and negotiations with
GlaxoSmithKline to license out its anaemia treatment Dynepo.

   In its written defence, Shire says that the allegations that TKT directors
had "personal" interests in selling the company were "unfounded" and calls the
allegations against Warburg Pincus "factually baseless and utterly illogical".
Shire also dismisses claims of a side deal with Langer and argues that the
plaintiffs bought most of their shares after the TKT acquisition had been
announced.

   According to the UK company: "Shire believes that this action is without
merit and intends to vigorously defend  itself. In particular, Shire believes
that [the] petitioner's claim challenging the approval of the merger is
completely unfounded as a legal and factual matter." It declined to comment
further.

   A priceless Pearl

   David Pearl, the private property entrepreneur, tells Mudlark he has
discovered the latest in corporate hospitality:  a nuclear submarine. The
booking has been made for a party of guests, and he can't wait.

   That was his first story, in any case. The only slightly more mundane reality
was that, through contacts, Pearl and a small entourage were invited aboard a
sub as guests of the Royal Navy and given a tour. No wonder that he is credited
with having a "special view of life", in the words of one associate.

   The hyperactive Pearl is, meanwhile, enjoying a new "relaxation" regime for
an hour or so most mornings at  about 5am. It involves his sitting in silence in
a big "Mastermind-style" chair while being given a shoulder massage.

   The last time Pearl appeared in this column it was because he had taken home
with him the bread from a meal with investment bankers at Lazard because it was
so tasty. That peccadillo remains, it seems. The bread at Jamie Oliver's
restaurant Fifteen is "orgasmic", he declares.

   Perfect harmony

   The partnership between UBS and the London Symphony Orchestra, a 10-year
relationship, was this week named Arts & Business Champion of the Year. The
award is the top accolade given by Arts & Business, a charity that promotes
sustainable links between the two sectors.

   Chancery cha cha

   Lovells' dancing lawyers raised GBP23,000 for Save the Children and
Fairbridge at their Legally Ballroom evening this week.

   Mooing and suing

   Robin Woodbine Parrish, El Oro and Exploration chairman, is in customary high
dudgeon in his latest letter to shareholders.

   His diatribe on the home front  "the dismal days of this dreadful government
draw slowly to a close" (the  Conservatives fare little better)  is a single
sentence of 231 words, employing no fewer than eight semicolons.

   Mudlark likes the image evoked by a near-miss in the choice of words: "The
plaintiff cries of cows culled by death-dealing Defra ..."

LOAD-DATE: 30 March 2007


                             996 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2007 The Financial Times Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved

                                     FT.com

                     2 February 2007 Friday 6:23:58 PM GMT

LENGTH: 1981 words

HEADLINE: Strife in the fast lane

BYLINE: David Owen

BODY:

   GENETIC TECHNOLOGY AND SPORT: Ethical Questionsedited by Claudio Tamburrini
and Torbjorn TannsjoRoutledge 23.99, 240 pagesFT bookshop price: 19.19

   FAUST'S GOLD: Inside the East German Doping Machineby Steven
UngerleiderThomas Dunne Books $23.95, 233 pages

   GAME OF SHADOWS: Barry Bonds, Balco and the Steroids Scandal that Rocked
Professional Sportsby Mark Fainaru-Wada and  Lance WilliamsGotham Books $26, 332
pages

   MARION JONES, LIFE IN THE FAST LANE: An Illustrated Autobiographyby Marion
Jones with Kate SekulesWarner Books $24.95, 226 pages

   Even the most inattentive sports fan must be aware of the increasingly
vigorous war on drugs being waged by sports authorities. Yet, in 2006 it
sometimes seemed as if more stars in more sports were associated with doping
controversies  than ever before. So this is probably not the most welcome time
to point out that sports doping may be on the brink of a giant leap forward -
and one that is very much performance enhanced.

   The source of the impending breakthrough is genetic technology, the unifying
theme of Genetic Technology and Sport, a meaty if demanding collection of
essays. The Sweden-based academics who edited the book, Claudio Tamburrini and
Torbjorn Tannsjo, believe the technology "poses a challenge to sport so serious
that it is hard to overestimate". Put bluntly, if not countered - and it is far
from certain that it can be - the technology could transform the nature of
competitive sport as we understand it today.

   Neither the intensity of the present anti-doping offensive or the emergence
of this new threat has yet been reflected in a proliferation of worthwhile books
on the subject - publishers clearly believe that fans would prefer to read
accounts of their heroes' sporting triumphs. Moreover, the covert nature of the
beast makes doping a difficult area to write about. So the books covered here
are some of the most thoughtful contributions to a sparsely served genre.

   Tamburrini and Tannsjo's collection has an academic tone and is clearly
geared to a specialist readership. However, the potential significance of the
subject matter makes it worth persevering with.

   Hitherto, doping in sport has involved, in essence, the introduction of
chemicals into the body, usually in repeated  doses, with the aim of improving
an athlete's performance. Many drugs - including anabolic steroids,
amphetamines,  blood boosters such as EPO (erythropoietin) and even caffeine -
have been pressed into service by athletes seeking an illicit edge. In many
cases, the resultant improvement has doubtless been minuscule or non-existent,
but this is a world in which millimetres can be the difference between anonymity
and glory.

   So-called "genetic doping" brings the promise - or nightmarish vision,
depending on your standpoint - of engineering permanent changes in the body to
fulfil the same goal. Athletes who resort to this form of enhancement would be
injected with a particular gene intended to improve the function of a normal
cell and boost their performance. Taken  to its logical conclusion, this
technology might one day facilitate the production of "designer athletes",
tailored to excel at a particular discipline. According to Tannsjo: "Sports
competitions would become similar to competitions in Formula 1. There are
certainly people driving the cars, but more important than their skill is the
design of the car. The same would be true of sports events in general."

   Although last year's trial of Thomas Springstein, a German athletics coach,
uncovered evidence indicating that genetic doping might already be a reality,
expert opinion suggests that this may have been an isolated incident. "At
present, gene doping is most likely not in use," writes Peter Schjerling, a
researcher at the Copenhagen Muscle Research Centre, in his contribution to the
collection. "But the fear is that when gene therapy develops, it will create a
huge potential for doping that will have a high impact on athletic performance
and be virtually impossible to detect."

   Detectability is critical. If the sporting authorities cannot reliably
identify those who are breaking the rules, then the rules, ultimately, would
have to be changed.

   Philosophy professor Christian Munthe's contribution focuses on controlling
genetic doping, and is particularly  thought-provoking. He suggests that to have
"even minor chances of detection", a control programme would have  to involve
"very extensive sample taking indeed". This is partly because the modified
cells, designed to produce substances capable of enhancing performance, would
not necessarily be situated in their "natural" place in the body, but might be
"hidden in suitable places... such as deep inside any of the great muscles of
the buttocks".

   Quite apart from the expense of testing extensively enough to be effective,
Munthe argues that the "health risks due to the repeated application of biopsy
procedures to various parts of the body have to be taken quite seriously".
Moreover, there are also ethical questions about the handling of intensely
personal information, such as predisposition for certain diseases, that such
analysis might reveal.

   It is tempting to think that even if the fear of detection, or plain old
honesty, did not deter athletes from experimenting with genetic doping, the
perils associated with turning themselves into laboratory rodents would. After
all, as Schjerling concludes: "Currently, gene therapy is still a very dangerous
technique and only the most foolish athlete would try to use it for doping at
present."

   Genetic Technology and Sport is not immune from shortcomings: it is at times
repetitive, and not all contributions are of equal value. But it rehearses
important arguments that will preoccupy sports decision-makers for decades to
come.

   Young athletes are often vulnerable and can be browbeaten into doing things
against their better judgment. Anyone sceptical of this should read Faust's
Gold, the account by Steven Ungerleider, an Oregon-based psychologist, of the
doping programme that helped transform East Germany, a relatively small country,
into an athletics and swimming powerhouse. The book occasionally had me grinding
my teeth - my copy incorrectly claims that Tom Hanks, rather than the  actual
victor Thomas Hicks, won the 1904 Olympic marathon. But the system it exposes
appears horrifyingly callous, with  young prospects being turned into winning
machines, seemingly without regard for their long-term health.

   Even when they are free to make up their own minds, there is evidence to
suggest that elite performers can be astonishingly reckless in their pursuit of
glory. Drugs, Sport, and Politics was originally published in 1991, but is now
currently out of print. In this classic account of drug use in sport in the late
20th century, Robert Voy, a former  chief medical officer for the US Olympic
committee, alludes to an exercise in which elite athletes were asked if,
hypothetically, they would be willing to take a pill that would guarantee them
an Olympic gold medal even if they knew this pill would kill them within a year.
More than 50 per cent of the athletes surveyed said they would. As Voy
concludes: "This is a terrifying indication of just how desperate athletes are
to win."

   Even 16 years after it was first published, Voy's book remains one of the
most lucid treatises on drugs in sport, partly because of his dispassionate
enumeration of what different categories of drugs can do. As he says: "I'm not
an alarmist. People aren't continually dropping dead from the use of AAS
[anabolic-androgenic steroids]. In fact, alcohol claims far more lives in one
year alone than AAS will in a decade. But death is a possible result of
anabolic-androgenic steroid use."

   Voy also puts his finger on one of the main drawbacks of the increasingly
punitive attitude to performance-enhancing  drugs manifested by sports
authorities in recent years. Namely that modern drug-testing programmes "have
unintentionally created a greater health danger in that athletes are now using
the shorter-acting, more toxic forms of these drugs to avoid detection".

   The extent to which steroids remain a problem for sport, even with a new era
of genetic doping fast approaching, has  been underlined by the so-called Balco
scandal. The Bay Area Laboratory Co-operative was a San Francisco-based
nutritional supplements company that the US Anti-Doping Agency claims developed
the banned steroid THG (tetrahydrogestrinone). Victor Conte, Balco's president,
eventually pleaded guilty to conspiring to distribute anabolic steroids to
athletes. He was sentenced to four months in jail and four months' home
confinement. Several prominent athletes have received sanctions for violations
involving drugs associated with the Balco conspiracy.

   Game of Shadows, a detailed account of the Balco investigation, implicating a
number of well-known figures from baseball as well as athletics, has now been
published - although it has yet to appear in the UK. San Francisco Chronicle
reporters Lance Williams and Mark Fainaru-Wada have written an impressively
sustained piece of investigative journalism. Ironically, the authors are
themselves under threat of prison because of their refusal to disclose the
sources of the supposedly secret grand jury testimony on which their account is
partly based. Their appeal against a jail sentence of up to 18 months is due to
be heard on February 12.

   One of the reasons why doping can be so corrosive to sport is that it leaves
audiences not knowing what to believe. How much are the feats of their heroes
down to hard work and natural ability? And how much can be attributed to some
performance-enhancing substance which may be dangerous not only to the athletes
themselves, but also to anyone who tries to mimic them?

   In recent years, probably the biggest victim of this sense of suspicion and
disillusionment has been the US sprinter  Marion Jones. Once the golden girl of
world athletics, Jones won five medals at the 2000 Olympics, but has since seen
her career mired in controversy. This in spite of repeated denials that she has
ever used performance-enhancing drugs.

   These denials were never clearer than in Marion Jones, Life in the Fast Lane,
her autobiography, completed before the 2004 Olympics in Athens, at which she
failed to win a medal. On page 173, the message is emblazoned in red capital
letters more than a centimetre high: "I have always been unequivocal in my
opinion: I am against performance-enhancing drugs. I have never taken them and I
never will take them."

   Yet Game of Shadows contains detailed allegations of how, according to
Balco's Conte as well as Jones's ex-husband, the former shot-putter C.J. Hunter,
Jones supposedly used banned performance-enhancing drugs. Hunter himself tested
positive for a steroid in 2000 and received a two-year ban, although he blamed
the results on a contaminated supplement.

   So who should we believe? Jones never failed a drug test. And would drug use,
even if proved, really nullify the wonder of some of her breathtakingly emphatic
victories? After all, some of her rivals over the years have themselves been
subject to bans, and drug use does not short-circuit the years of hard grind
required for an athlete to have any chance of victory.

   It's clear that sports decision-makers will find themselves increasingly
reflecting on these issues over coming  years, as genetic technology becomes
safer and more sophisticated. "What is at stake," write Tamburrini and Tannsjo,
"is the very ethos of sport, nothing less than an epochal confrontation between
a model of human identity  as spelled out in the book of Genesis and a
science-based libertarian model."

   Sport is not the only area of human endeavour being forced to face up to the
consequences of this confrontation. The  question is: are its leaders up to the
challenge?

   David Owen is a former sports editor of the FT.

LOAD-DATE: 2 February 2007


                             997 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2006 The Financial Times Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved

                                     FT.com

                     1 December 2006 Friday 4:48:43 PM GMT

LENGTH: 469 words

HEADLINE: Mission impossible?

BYLINE: Salamander Davoudi

BODY:

   Twenty years after the discovery of Aids, no preventative vaccine has ever
been successfully developed. The drugtherapy that dominates the market has been
the same for more than a decade. But at the cutting edge of research into theHIV
virus is an innovative new form of gene therapy that hopes to use the HIV virus
to turn on itself.

   "You can take HIV, mess around with it, make it less pathogenic and put a DNA
payload into it," says David Brooks, business development manager at Medical
Marketing International, a pharmaceutical development company.

   "Then you use the modified virus to deliver an antiviral payload. You are
essentially using the virus againstitself and I love that."

   Data from recent trials in the US has showed encouraging results. Researchers
are hoping to engineer a gene that,when put into a cell, would make all of its
offspring resistant to the virus. As part of the study carried out byVirxsys, a
US-based biotechnology company in collaboration with the University of
Pennsylvania, five patients had their T cells removed  immune cells which
usually act to fight viruses. An altered version of HIV was injected into
thesecells.

   Results showed that, when put back inside infected cells, the manipulated
cells interfered with the reproduction ofthe HIV virus. While the virus
continued to break down the immune cells in the body, new immune cells could not
beinfected. Results also showed that the virus load in the patients remained
stable or decreased whereas the T cell count remained the same or increased in
four out of five patients.

   "The notion of using engineered versions of the virus itself to fight the
virus is an interestingapproach," says Alan Kingsman chief executive of Oxford
BioMedica, the UK biotechnology company.

   Researchers were pleasantly surprised that the treatment was effectively
tackling the disease in patients for whomtraditional drug therapy had failed.

   In one patient, the treatment cut the amount of virus in his blood by a
factor of about 50 at the end of 12months.

   Unlike the majority of drug therapies on the market for HIV medications,
which have to be taken daily or severaltimes a day, it is hoped that this
treatment can be taken once a day and will keep fighting the infection.

   Oxford BioMedica has developed a product called ImmStat, a similar gene-based
therapeutic for HIV infection and Aids.The tests were the first on humans. The
next phase will involve trials on a larger number of patients including
thosewhose disease is at an early stage. In this test, the patients will get
more than one transfusion of the treated cells. Those on standard drug
treatment, after the new therapy, will be asked to interrupt their drugs to see
if the infection returns. If subsequent trials confirm early data, gene therapy
could unlock the door to a much needed vaccine.

LOAD-DATE: 1 December 2006


                             998 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2006 The Financial Times Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved

                                     FT.com

                     1 December 2006 Friday 4:43:32 PM GMT

LENGTH: 807 words

HEADLINE: The future is genetic

BYLINE: Clive Cookson

BODY:

   Therapy for HIV infection and Aids has fallen into a series of phases, each
lasting for about a decade. The firstbegan with the launch of the original Aids
medicine AZT in 1987, just six years after medical science recognised
thedisease. The second started in 1996, when drug combinations known as highly
active antiretroviral therapy or Haartbecame available. Arguably, this year
marks the start of a third phase with the launch of Atripla  Haart in a
singledaily tablet.

   Atripla is the culmination of a trend over the past five years to combine the
vast numbers of pills that patients on Haart had to take in the late 1990s
often as many as 20 per day  into fewer capsules. It contains two
compoundsdeveloped by Gilead, a large Californian biotechnology company that has
emerged as a leader in the Aids drug market, andone from Bristol-Myers Squibb of
the US.

   "You need the three drugs fully to suppress the virus and prevent mutations,"
says John Martin,Gilead's chief executive. His company's sales of Aids drugs
have soared from$900m in 2004 to $1.4bn last yearand a projected $2bn this year.

   Datamonitor, a London-based business information company monitoring the Aids
market, forecasts that Atripla approved by the US Food and Drug Administration
in July but not yet available in Europe  "will become the topselling HIV drug by
a wide margin."

   "The enthusiasm for Atripla is extraordinary," says Holger Rovini, senior
Datamonitor infectious diseasesanalyst. "Everyone wants it." Projections from
Datamonitor show the global HIV drug market growing from $7.2bnlast year to
$10bn in 2015. GlaxoSmithKline has held the largest share from the start but its
dominance will disappearas GSK products lose their patent protection and better
alternatives appear. Gilead is the only independentbiotechnology company to have
made a big impact on the HIV/Aids market. The other biotech company with a
promisingpipeline, Tibotec of Belgium, was bought in 2002 by Johnson & Johnson,
the US pharmaceutical giant  though J&J continues to maintain Tibotec as a
separate research and development operation in Mechelen, Belgium.

   Tibotec's first commercial product, Prezista, received FDA approval in June
and the company has two other drugs in advanced clinical trials. Karen Manson,
Tibotec vice-president, says the special feature of its research is toprofile
viral drug resistance during the discovery process, so that drug candidates
moving into clinical development canovercome the HIV's extraordinary genetic
variability.

   According to Mr Rovini, Tibotec/J&J is likely to show the fast growth of all
HIV drug companies over the next fewyears. It will be number four in the market
in 2015, behind Gilead, BMS and GSK.

   The FDA lists 28 medicines approved for HIV infection, including several
combinations. There is room for all of them in the market because Aids is a
complex disease in which patients at different stages require different
treatments.People who have been infected relatively recently and not previously
treated for HIV may thrive on a product such asAtripla, which would be
unsuitable for those who are in the late stages of Aids and need drastic
"salvage"therapy to keep them alive.

   The problem for Aids patients is that, once they start drug therapy, they
have to keep on the medication indefinitelyto keep the disease under control.
HIV inserts itself into the DNA of cells in the human immune system, in a way
thatmakes it impossible for any conventional drug combination to eradicate the
infection and therefore "cure"Aids.

   But some avenues of research offer glimmers of hope in the long term. One
approach is gene therapy. Last month acollaboration between the University of
Pennsylvania and Virxsys, a biotech spin-out from Johns Hopkins
University,reported the first clinical trial results of an experimental gene
therapy called VRX496 in Aids patients.

   The researchers removed immune cells from five people who had failed to
respond to at least two Aids drug regimes,infected the cells with HIV that had
been genetically engineered to inhibit viral replication and transplanted them
backinto the patients. The idea is that these cells carrying the disabled virus
would multiply in the immune system, resist re-infection and replace the ones
killed by HIV. Riku Rautsola, Virxsys chief executive, says: "VRX496
isengineered in a way that debilitates HIV's ability to replicate and mutate
around the therapy, overcoming a common problem with current drug treatments."

   Although VRX496's first trial results are promising, with HIV levels
decreasing and immune cell countsincreasing in all five patients, far more
development will be required over many years before gene therapy stands achance
of becoming a standard treatment for Aids. For at least another decade, patients
will have to rely onconventional chemical drugs to keep HIV at bay.

LOAD-DATE: 1 December 2006


                             999 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2006 The Financial Times Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved

                                     FT.com

                       25 June 2006 Sunday 5:06:04 PM GMT

LENGTH: 552 words

HEADLINE: Briefing: the weekend papers

BODY:

   Severstal, the Russian Steel group is set to improve its offer for Arcelor as
it tries to thwart rival Arcelor's bid.

   Norilsk the Russian metals giant is planning an $8bn (GBP4.4bn) London
listing for Polygus Gold, its gold subsidiary early next year.

   Eros International has been forced to slash its flotation price. The
Bollywood film company planned to raise more than$100m but now intends to
raise$40m after Evolution Securities, its broker, found a faltering IPO market
has made the fundraising process harder.

   Stanley Leisure, the casino operator, has opened merger talks with London
Clubs International. The deal which would  create GBP700m gaming industry
heavyweight is being orchestrated by Genting, the Malaysian conglomerate which
is a major shareholder in both companies.

   Mittal Steel is close to winning approval for its takeover bid from Arcelor's
directors with an improved GBP18bn offer. Severstal, the Russian steelmaker is
likely to take legal action against Arcelor if it backs the Mittal bid. Joseph
Kinsch, Arcelor's chairman could become chairman of a combined group.

   BT is drawing up plans to bid for iSoft, the troubled NHS software supplier.

   The CBI is to investigate whether British companies are too soft a takeover
target for foreign predators.

   Pfizer,the US drugs giant, has blamed the UK's bureaucratic planning system
for its decision to axe plans to locate its European headquarters in Britain and
switch to Germany instead.

   Rosneft will unveil the price range for its London flotation today. The
Russian oil giant is expected to be valued around $70bn after a $10bn to $13bn
equity placing in London in July.

   Serono, the Swiss biotechnology group could launch a takeover for Shire
Pharmaceuticals. This would allow access to  Transkaryotic Therapies products,
the US company which Shire outbid Serono for in 1994.

   A third of British Airways flights to Spain this summer could be affected
after pilots at Iberia, its partner, voted to strike.

   RWE, the German power giant will open Thames Water's books to bidders this
week. Terra Firma, the private equity group run by Guy Hands and Macquarie, the
Australian investment bank are leading contenders in the GBP7bn auction.

   The joint investigation by the Office of Fair Trading and the US Justice
Department into airline price fixing will target all four long haul operators
that fly from Heathrow.

   Deutsche Borse has held talks with Borsa Italiana in a bid to derail
Euronext's proposed deal with the Italian  exchange. The move is part of a plan
to lure Euronext to the negotiating table and way from a deal with the New York
Stock Exchange.

   Terra Firma, the private equity group run by Guy Hands, is considering a bid
for Britain's National Lottery licence.

   A secret plan to introduce nationwide compulsory water metering is being
worked on by David Milliband, the environment secretary.

   Blockbuster, Britain's largest high street rental chain, has been put up for
sale by its American parent with the disposal expected to raise more than
GBP300m.

   National Grid, the electricity and gas network supplier has been rocked by a
mulit-million pound fraud and called in investigators to find out how far it
extends

   Land Securities and Shaftesbury Estates, the property giants are, competing
to buy Covent garden piazza and market hall for about GBP400m.

LOAD-DATE: 25 June 2006


                             1000 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2010 The Financial Times Limited
All Rights Reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistribute by
                           email or post to the web.

                                     FT.com

                      October 29, 2010 Friday 11:12 PM GMT

LENGTH: 2584 words

HEADLINE: Lightning in a bottle

BYLINE: Steven Johnson

BODY:

   In late 2005, I was working on the closing chapters of a book about the 1854
cholera outbreak in London and the brilliant map generated by the physician John
Snow that ultimately solved the mystery of cholera's waterborne nature. I was
writing about London from my home on the south side of Brooklyn's Park Slope,
part of what is often called "Brownstone Brooklyn", a hub of rapidly gentrifying
New York City neighbourhoods where many writers, professional and aspiring, had
settled. Some of those writers had begun blogging about their communities,
writing about local real-estate gossip and school-board elections and crime
data, in blogs such as Brownstoner and Only The Blog Knows Brooklyn.

   I was fascinated by the way those local bloggers were covering their
communities: they were writing on a block-by-block scale that closely matched
the experience of actually living in a city neighbourhood, with a "granularity"
- that fine level of detail you get when you zoom in on a map - that a big city
newspaper (with its rather wider map) could never hope to achieve. I grew so
fascinated, in fact, that they became my primary procrastination device as I was
writing my book. Each morning, before crafting some new sentences about the
neighbourhoods of Victorian London, I would linger on the latest blog posts
about my own.

   Somehow, in the collision between these two different spaces, a new idea
began to take shape in my mind, prodded along by the news that Google had
recently opened up its mapping software to outside developers. Perhaps, I
thought, someone could create a site that would take all these different local
voices and literally put them on a map, and show you all the conversations that
were happening about places on your block, or in your postcode. A few months
after the idea first occurred to me, I mentioned it to two friends - a film
producer and a screenwriter - and they liked it enough to offer some seed
capital to build a prototype. I found a few talented collaborators who turned my
hunch into something much more substantial, and, by the autumn of 2006, we had a
start-up with employees and a beta version of our site online at www.outside.in.
Four years later, more than 100 news organisations, including CNN, rely on our
platform for neighbourhood-level news.

   The tabular content relating to this article is not available to view.
Apologies in advance for the inconvenience caused.

   My experience in starting outside.in was hardly unusual. It turned out that
all around me in New York City, new web start-ups were flourishing. Just a month
ago, a study by market research firm CB Insights declared that New York has
overtaken the original East Coast technology hub, Boston, in the amount of
venture capital and early-stage investment flowing into internet companies,
leaving it second only to Silicon Valley in the US rankings.

   Some of the most emulated web companies, such as the gossip site Gawker;
location-based social media site Foursquare; the personal health network
Everyday Health; and Etsy, a marketplace for handcrafted goods, have originated
in Manhattan and Brooklyn over the past five years. For the first time in nearly
a half century, since the heyday of Bell Labs (the research offshoot of AT&T),
New York has become a world leader in high-tech innovation.

   The musician and artist Brian Eno coined the odd but apt word "scenius" to
describe the unusual pockets of group creativity and invention that emerge in
certain intellectual or artistic scenes: philosophers in 18th-century Scotland;
Parisian artists and intellectuals in the 1920s. In Eno's words, scenius is "the
communal form of the concept of the genius." New York hasn't yet reached those
heights in terms of internet innovation, but clearly something powerful has
happened. There is genuine digital-age scenius on its streets. This is good news
for my city, of course, but it's also an important case study for any city that
wishes to encourage innovative business. How did New York pull it off?

   There are no easy answers. Kevin Kelly, co-founder of Wired magazine and
author of What Technology Wants (2010), writes in the book: "The serendipitous
ingredients for scenius are hard to control. They depend on the presence of the
right early pioneers. A place that is open, but not too open. A buffer that is
tolerant of outlaws. And some flash of excitement to kick off the virtuous
circle. You just can't order this."

   And yet, even if scenius is lightning in a bottle, there are surely some
practices that make you more likely to capture the lightning when it does
strike. In an age of public sector austerity on both sides of the Atlantic the
good news is that most of them don't involve massive top-down government
spending. (Although, in New York's case, it does help to have a tech-geek
entrepreneur as mayor, in the form of billionaire Michael Bloomberg.)

   A vibrant start-up culture requires a healthy community of venture capital
firms willing to back risky ideas. New York has a number of gifted venture and
angel investors, led by Fred Wilson and Brad Burnham at Union Square Ventures,
which supports a number of the city's web start-ups including outside.in. But
investors need ideas perhaps more than ideas need investors, particularly in an
age when starting a web business is amazingly cheap. So the real question is:
how did New York find itself generating so many interesting ideas?

   Scenius may fuel commercial ventures, but its roots often lie outside the
marketplace. One secret to New York's technological success lies in the
Interactive Telecommunications Program (ITP), a two-year graduate course at New
York University. In spite of its focus on technology, the ITP is nonetheless
based in the Tisch School of the Arts, and its official description emphasises
an "imaginative use of communications technologies."

   Founded by the visionary scholar Red Burns, who created the programme in the
late 1970s, the faculty includes high-profile new media guru Clay Shirky. The
author of Here Comes Everybody (2008) - a book that outlines how technology
allows us to organise without the need for formal organisations - is also mentor
to countless aspiring web entrepreneurs. ITP graduates have gone on to found or
work for hundreds of startups in the area. Dennis Crowley, Foursquare's founder,
co-created the first draft of the location-based social network - a service
called Dodgeball, eventually sold to Google - while he was still a student at
ITP in 2000. My two early collaborators on outside.in, John Geraci and Cory
Forsyth, had both been at ITP.

   The physical density of the city also encourages innovation. Many start-ups,
both now and during the first, late-1990s internet boom, share offices. This
creates informal networks of influence, where ideas can pass from one company to
the other over casual conversation at the espresso machine or water cooler. When
we started outside.in, we shared a Brooklyn office with a documentary film
company for its first year of existence. Today, our much larger office in
Manhattan also houses three other smaller start-ups working on unrelated
projects. By crowding together, we increase the likelihood of interesting ideas
or talents crossing the companies' borders. The proximity also helps to counter
the natural volatility of start-ups: in outside.in's early days, we "borrowed" a
few talented employees from the documentary film company, which was temporarily
downsizing. When the projects picked up again, some of those employees moved
back. Others had found a new calling in the web world and stayed with us.

   Economists have a telling phrase for the kind of sharing that happens in
these densely populated environments: "information spillover." When you share a
civic culture with millions of people, good ideas have a tendency to flow from
mind to mind, even when their creators try to keep them secret.

   All of these spaces - the graduate schools, the co-working offices, the media
environments - exhibit the final trait that has been key to New York's
technological success: its diversity. A number of studies have established an
essential connection between diversity and innovation. One such study, by the
Stanford Business School professor Martin Ruef, interviewed 766 graduates of the
school who had gone on to have entrepreneurial careers. Ruef was interested in
the diversity of professions and disciplines, not of race or sexual orientation.
He created an elaborate system for scoring innovation based on a combination of
factors: the introduction of new products, say, or the filing of trademarks and
patents. Then he tracked each graduate's social network - not just the number of
acquaintances but the kind of acquaintances they had. Some graduates had large
social networks that were clustered within their organisation; others had small
insular groups dominated by friends and family. Some had wide-ranging
connections outside their inner circle of friends and colleagues.

   Ruef discovered that the most creative individuals consistently had broad
social networks that extended outside their organisation and involved people
from various fields of expertise. In groups united by shared values and
long-term familiarity, conformity and convention tended to dampen any potential
creative sparks. The limited reach of the network meant that concepts from the
outside rarely entered the entrepreneur's consciousness. But the entrepreneurs
who built bridges outside their "islands," as Ruef called them, were able to
borrow or co-opt new ideas from these external environments.

   As a diverse city that supports countless industries and maverick interests,
New York excels at creating those eclectic networks. Subcultures and small
businesses generate ideas and skills that inevitably diffuse through society,
influencing other groups. As the sociologist Claude Fischer put it in an
influential essay on subcultures published in 1975, "The larger the town, the
more likely it is to contain, in meaningful numbers and unity, drug addicts,
radicals, intellectuals, 'swingers', health-food faddists, or whatever; and the
more likely they are to influence (as well as offend) the conventional center of
the society."

   Those unusual influences leak out into the business world, and shape the
ideas - and the personnel - of startups. The same pattern can be found in the
last great flowering of high-tech scenius in Silicon Valley, which was shaped as
much by the counterculture that thrived in the San Francisco Bay Area as it was
by the engineering prowess of Stanford University.

   That diversity shows in the kinds of technology companies New York has
produced. They are not just tech-for-tech's-sake projects. Instead, they use
software to enhance other passions: parenting, crafts, gossip, gameplay, health,
and so on. They use technology in clever ways, but they are fundamentally about
something else. I think that quality derives from their metropolitan roots, from
the scenius of a big city. It is no accident that the slogan of Meetup, the
éminence grise of New York start-ups, which allows groups of people with shared
interests to organise face-to-face meetings, is "using the Internet to get off
the Internet". You can't stay at home, staring at a screen all night, when
there's so much happening on your doorstep.

   We hear a great deal about the social virtues of diversity and
multiculturalism; we're reminded constantly that we'll be better and more
tolerant human beings if we open ourselves up to different perspectives. But
approaching the virtues of diversity from this perspective of its impact on
business innovation suggests that exposing yourself to a wide range of
perspectives and fields of expertise, and creating environments where those
different perspectives can clash and share resources, creates as much economic
value as it does social or aesthetic value.

   This is related to the essential argument that sociologist Richard Florida
makes for the economic importance of cultural creatives, most notably in his
2002 book, The Rise Of The Creative Class. Vibrant music scenes or poetry salons
doesn't just make your city more colourful and quirky; they create economic
capital as well as cultural capital, precisely because the diversity of views
and expressions shapes the minds of entrepreneurs and investors. Good ideas need
marketplaces and investors to support their growth into mature businesses, but
they also need environments that help trigger those original ideas in the first
place.

   Living in a society where we encounter different backgrounds and professions
in our daily routines makes for a more tolerant society; it also makes us
smarter, more original in the ideas we have - and in the companies we create.

   'Where Good Ideas Come From: The Natural History of Innovation' (Allen Lane,
£20), by Steven Johnson, was published earlier this month. Johnson will be
giving a free public lecture at the LSE on Tuesday November 2 at 6.30pm. Details
at www.lse.ac.uk.

   ..................................................

   Tim Harford on Steven Johnson: How can you inspire that elusive 'eureka'
moment?

   In 1961, a young scientist named Mario Capecchi sought the advice of Harvard
University's James Watson, the co-discoverer of DNA. Capecchi was excited by the
new field of molecular biology and wanted to seek Watson's view about where he
should study it.

   "Here," came the reply. "You would be f**king crazy to go anywhere else." As
Capecchi recalls: "The simplicity of the message was very persuasive."

   Steven Johnson's latest work Where Good Ideas Come From offers the same
message, and it is equally persuasive: if you want to develop new ideas, get
yourself right at the heart of the action.

   Think of Athens in the fifth century BC, Vienna in the 19th century, or
Silicon Valley since the 1950s - ideas breed ideas. This particular view has
been explored in great detail by such writers Jane Jacobs and Peter Hall, and
more recently by Richard Florida and Matt Ridley.

   Yet Johnson now offers something new: a discursive style that is the very
opposite of James Watson's bluntness. No point is too minor to be illustrated
with a flourish.

   My favourite discovery was that many enlightenment-era thinkers kept what
they called a "commonplace" book in which to transcribe favourite quotations and
ideas. Some of these books were laboriously indexed to allow different concepts
to bleed into each other.

   But there is another side to any good story. Mario Capecchi, for example,
eventually rejected James Watson's advice and moved to the University of Utah -
as far from the buzz of molecular biology as one can imagine. Capecchi had
decided that Harvard was too focused on short-term, shallow results.

   His strategy was the same as Lockheed's "skunk works", which developed the U2
and the stealth aircraft; or Scaled Composites, the company that designed the
first private spaceship in the desert town of Mojave. Capecchi deliberately
sought a measure of isolation while he worked on breakthroughs in gene therapy.
Three years ago, he received his reward: the Nobel prize in medicine.

   Johnson is right to emphasise that ideas emerge from a tangle of other ideas
- but once they have emerged and need somewhere to develop, the story becomes
messier. I'll be discussing this question, and others, with Steven Johnson in an
FT.com podcast on Monday.

   Tim Harfordis the FT's Undercover Economist

   Copyright The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and
paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.

LOAD-DATE: October 29, 2010


                             1001 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2010 The Financial Times Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                                     FT.com

                       July 23, 2010 Friday 11:30 PM GMT

LENGTH: 472 words

HEADLINE: Of genes and genomes

BYLINE: Margaret McCartney

BODY:

   Doctors often prescribe medicines that are not adequately tailored to the
individual. There is not much we can do to avoid this with conventional
treatments. But with the human genome now mapped, some are predicting a new era
of "personalised medicine", in which patients can have their genes matched to
the best treatment.

   It is a nice theory, but I don't buy it. We may now know the ingredients of
the genome, but it doesn't mean we can cook up whatever we please. For example,
we are able to identify genetic foetal disorders in pregnancy, such as Down's
syndrome, but the only "treatment" remains abortion. There remains a lack of
true genetic "therapies" - where someone can have a treatment which manipulates
their genetic material. Trials with conditions such as Parkinson's disease or
rheumatoid arthritis have offered some hope that genetic treatment could be
provided - but to date human data has been obtained on a very small scale.

   The other major problem is that most genetic information does not give us
clear-cut answers. Genes will tell you what you may be at increased risk and
decreased risk of. These risks do not operate in isolation. If a smoker has a
particular genetic sequence putting him or her at lower than average risk of
cancer, smoking is still going to be riskier than not smoking.

   Other doctors have pronounced the genome as the answer to getting better
cancer therapies to those most likely to benefit. But this is also far messier
than we might expect. HER2 genes, on breast cancer cells, have been celebrated
as something that science can pinpoint to save lives. Having HER2 means that a
woman is more likely to respond to medication such as trastuzumab (Herceptin).
However, the test for HER2 is itself suboptimal, with the amount of cells
picking up a stain in a petri dish used to judge if this genetic protein is
present. Various new sets of guidelines have tried to minimise error but it is
not a test which always gives true results. Even then, only between 25 and 30
per cent of those with the HER2 gene will respond to the drug targeting it. It
may be a useful treatment, but is hardly the revolution we were promised.

   My worry is that the use of genetic risk assessments to direct treatment will
produce more dilemmas rather than less. Many of these conundrums will rest on
our ability to assess and judge our risk of disease - and our abilities to
prevent it. If anything is meant by the term "personalisation", it should be our
own view on how to deal with the risks we know we are running, and far less
about our genetic code.

   Margaret McCartney is a GP in Glasgow

   margaret.mccartney@ft.com

   To follow Margaret's blog go to:www.margaretmccartney.com/blog

   Copyright The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and
paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.

LOAD-DATE: July 23, 2010


                             1002 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2010 The Financial Times Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                                     FT.com

                       May 11, 2010 Tuesday 12:05 AM GMT

LENGTH: 995 words

HEADLINE: Finding the Right Balance on Gene Patents

BYLINE: Richard Epstein

BODY:

   Will the US Supreme Court further cut back on the scope of patent protection?
That's the question courts and commentators alike are askling as they await the
Court's decision in the Bilski case, which deals with business method patents.

   One manifestation of that underlying uneasiness concerns gene patents, and by
extension, patents over other substances naturally occurring in human beings and
other organisms. In a recent editorial Joseph Stiglitz and John Sulston, Nobel
Laureates in Economics and Medicine respectively, added their voices to the
growing list of critics of genetic patents.

   The immediate target of their wrath is the gene patents held by Myriad
Corporation over the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes that have been implicated in breast
cancer. These patents were invalidated by Judge Robert W. Sweet in the federal
district court in Manhattan in March. The atypical claims at issue in that case
related to both substance and process. The first patent claimed exclusive rights
over both these genes. The second claimed exclusive rights over methods used to
"analyze" and "compare" various BRCA genes.

   At a narrow level, the decision to invalidate these two patents is consistent
with the traditional rules of patent law. On the first score, the key point is
that substances naturally occurring in nature are normally not subject to patent
protection because they represent neither a manufactured good nor a new
composition of matter. That limit on patent protection surely makes sense for
natural substances, but only so long as they are found in nature. For nearly 100
years, however, that general legal rule has not applied to substances that are
"isolated and purified" for commercial use outside the body.

   In his famous 1911 decision in Parke-Davis & Co v HK Mulford & Co , Judge
Learned Hand carved out an exception to that general rule, saying "while it is
of course possible logically to call this a purification of the principle, it
became for every practical purpose a new thing commercially and therapeutically.
That was a good ground for a patent."

   This brief remark, first applied the isolation and purification of adrenalin,
undergirds huge swaths of modern medical research. A simple form of prudence
should have led Stiglitz and Sulston to back away from a massive reorientation
of a law on which billions of dollars have been invested, based on their
unhappiness with two Myriad gene patents.

   Nor is there any reason to take that huge step given that the Myriad patents
could well  be vulnerable to attack even under the traditional framework of
patent protection. As Stiglitz and Sulston rightly note, it is galling, to say
the least, for women to have to pay Myriad $3,000 for assays done on their own
DNA when other vendors could supply a similar service for less. But Hand's
opinion extends patent protection only for substances isolated and purified for
commercial use outside the body. It does not displace the general rule against
patenting natural substances inside the body. Thus Myriad gets exclusive rights
over standard commercial uses of its genes, but not over the gene that is tested
from an individual woman.

   Myriad's second set of claims that cover the further exploration of the
operation of these BRCA genes are vulnerable on different grounds. In the 19th
century, the US Supreme Court held that Samuel Morse could patent his telegraph
device, but could not patent the exclusive right to exploit the electromagnetic
spectrum. In 2004, the University of Rochester was denied a patent over the site
that subject to treatment by COX2 inhibitors such as Vioxx or Celebrex, even
though those drugs were clearly patentable. The same logic applies here. Myriad
is certainly entitled to patent its devices to examine and study the BRCA genes,
but it cannot prevent competition from other parties using different devices.

   So narrowed, Judge Sweet's decision leaves entirely untouched the wide range
of genetic patents over isolated and purified substances outside the body. There
is, moreover, good reason to think that Stiglitz and Sulston are wrong to
suggest that subjecting these substances to patent protection has inhibited
medical research. Our understanding of the complex array of genetic interactions
has advanced mightily under the current law. That progress would be inexplicable
if they were right. Why, moreover, is a company likely to invest billions of
dollars in research unless it can count on some modest measure of exclusivity.
To analogize patented gene therapies (as opposed to understanding the
fundamentals of genetic science) to non patentable mathematical theorems or laws
of nature is way off base.

   Indeed, one of the great spurs to biomedical innovation in the US has been
the Bayh-Dole Act of 1980, which encourages both universities and their
scientists to seek patent protection for the products generated by their
federally funded biomedical research. If Stiglitz and Sulston were right about
the supposed threats of patents to innovations, the government policy should
have been the reverse: prohibit universities and their research scientists from
patenting products produced by their publicly funded research in order to expand
the public domain. Thirty years of activity under the statute suggests that it
is not a good idea. The same is true for patent law. For nearly 100 years the
patent law has not followed their unwise counsel. Let the BRCA gene cases be
decided on narrow grounds one way or the other. Under no circumstances should
two atypical patents spell the doom of patent protection where it is so
manifestly needed.

   Richard A. Epstein is the James Parker Hall Distinguished Service Professor
of Law, The University of Chicago; the Peter and Kirsten Bedford Senior Fellow,
The Hoover Institution; and a visiting law professor at New York University Law
School.

   Copyright The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and
paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.

LOAD-DATE: May 10, 2010


                             1003 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2010 The Financial Times Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                                     FT.com

                      April 22, 2010 Thursday 3:35 PM GMT

LENGTH: 843 words

HEADLINE: Vaccine development: Hopeful results lead to first large-scale trial

BYLINE: Clive Cookson

BODY:

   Over the past year, 9,000 babies and young children in seven African
countries have received a shot of the first malaria vaccine to undergo a
large-scale clinical trial. Eventually as many as 16,000 children will receive
the so-called RTS,S vaccine.

   "We are very happy with the way enrolment is going," says Joe Cohen of
GlaxoSmithKline Biologicals in Belgium, who has been working on RTS,S for more
than 20 years.

   The vaccine originated with research at the Walter Reed Army Institute of
Research in the US in the mid 1980s. After GSK had taken up RTS,S, tests in
adult volunteers started in the US in 1992 and Africa in 1998.

   A public-private partnership between GSK and the Path Malaria Vaccine
Initiative (MVI) began in 2001 to put RTS,S through more extensive "Phase 2"
trials with African children. Their encouraging results - showing an efficacy
for the vaccine of about 50 per cent - led to the current much larger-scale
"Phase 3" trial.

   Altogether, GSK has already invested $300m in RTS,S and expects to invest at
least $100m more before the project is finished. MVI has spent $200m, provided
mainly by the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation.

   The long and expensive history of RTS,S illustrates the patience needed to
develop malaria vaccines. And the story is far from at an end because, while a
vaccine that provides 50 per cent protection would reduce significantly the toll
of 800,000 African children under five who die every year from malaria, MVI aims
to have a vaccine with 80 per cent efficacy available by 2025.

   However Christian Loucq, MVI director, says future vaccines can be developed
more quickly and at somewhat lower cost than RTS,S. Phase 3 vaccine trials
require thousands of participants but the number becomes smaller as the vaccine
becomes more effective, as greater effectiveness shows up more quickly. And the
African infrastructure set up for the RTS,S trial could be used again.

   Dozens of potentially more effective candidate vaccines are in earlier stages
of development in academic and industry labs around the world. For maximum
effectiveness they are likely to be used in combination rather than
individually.

   A partnership announced earlier this month between GSK and Crucell, the Dutch
biotechnology company, is a pointer to the way things will go.

   The two companies will carry out clinical trials with a combination of RTS,S
with Crucell's Ad35-CS vaccine candidate. Animal tests have already shown a
significant enhancement when the two are used together.

   The immune-stimulating antigen in both vaccines is a surface protein from the
so-called sporozoite stage of the malaria parasite's complex life cycle - the
stage at which it enters the human bloodstream after a mosquito bite, and heads
toward the liver where it will mature and multiply. But the antigen is packaged
in different ways.

   In RTS,S the antigen protein is administered with an "adjuvant" that boosts
the immune response. In Ad35-CS the antigen is inserted into an adenovirus, a
type of virus associated with mild respiratory infections, which delivers it to
the immune system (adenoviruses are also used as vectors for gene therapy).

   At an earlier stage of research - and using a very different antigen - is a
"transmission-blocking vaccine" or TBV being developed by Johns Hopkins
Bloomberg School of Public Health and the Sabin Vaccine Institute with support
from MVI. This approach aims to stop the malaria parasite developing in the
mosquito, so it cannot pass the infection on to humans.

   The TBV uses a mosquito antigen called AnANP1, which plays an important role
in the parasite's establishment within the insect. Field research shows that
AnANP1 induces mosquito antibodies that prevent the parasite invading the
insect's gut, and the idea is that vaccinated humans would pass enhanced levels
of the antigen on to the mosquitoes that bite them.

   While a TBV would offer no immediate protection against malaria to the
vaccinated individual, the benefits would accumulate over time as the number of
infections declines with time in the community.

   Another potentially fruitful field of research focuses on preventing malaria
in pregnancy. Women are particularly vulnerable to infection while pregnant,
because their immune defences are lowered and because the parasites accumulate
in the placenta. Maternal malaria kills 10,000 women and 100,000 to 200,000
babies every year.

   Researchers at the University of Copenhagen are developing a potential
vaccine based on the VAR2CSA antigen which should elicit antibodies that stop
the parasite binding to the placenta.

   The Danish scientists have the elegant idea of attaching VAR2CSA to the human
papilloma virus (HPV) vaccines that have recently been introduced to prevent
cervical cancer. If HPV can indeed act as a carrier for the placental malaria
vaccine, then it would be possible to protect girls in Africa against both
placental malaria and cervical cancer with a single shot.

   Copyright The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and
paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.

LOAD-DATE: April 22, 2010


                             1004 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2010 The Financial Times Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                                     FT.com

                      April 14, 2010 Wednesday 5:50 PM GMT

LENGTH: 514 words

HEADLINE: DNA transfer in human eggs prevents disease

BYLINE: Clive Cookson, Science Editor

BODY:

   Scientists have for the first time transferred DNA between human eggs. The
success at Newcastle University opens the door to a powerful but potentially
controversial form of "germ-line gene therapy", which would prevent the
transmission of some inherited diseases

   The Newcastle team aims to stop mothers passing on defective "mitochondrial
DNA". This genetic material controls mitochondria, microscopic energy-producing
bodies often called the cell's batteries.

   About one child in 200 is born with harmful mutations in the mitochondrial
genes. Usually this causes only mild effects, but about one in 6,500 children
develops severe mitochondrial disease; symptoms include muscular weakness, heart
or liver failure, blindness and neurological problems.

   The research, published in the journal Nature, involved extracting the two
"pronuclei" - the nuclear DNA from mother and father - from a newly fertilised
human egg. The pronuclei were inserted into a fertilised donor egg whose own
nuclear material had been removed.

   The resulting fertilised egg contains the parents' nuclear DNA but
mitochondria from the egg donor. "What we've done is like changing the battery
on a laptop," said Doug Turnbull, the project leader.

   "The energy supply now works properly, but none of the information on the
hard drive has been changed," Prof Turnbull added. "A child born using this
method would have correctly functioning mitochondria, but in every other respect
would get all their genetic information from their father and mother."

   The experiments were carried out with eggs obtained from donors undergoing
treatment at the Newcastle Fertility Centre; the eggs had abnormalities that
made them unsuitable for use in IVF.

   After the DNA transfer, the fertilised eggs were cultured in the laboratory
for a week, until they reached the blastocyst (early embryo) stage, which is as
far as the work can go under the university's research licence from the Human
Fertilisation and Embryology Authority.

   The team plans further studies to provide evidence of the procedure's safety,
and do not expect it to be ready for use in patients for about three years. The
current Human Fertilisation and Embryology Act bans fertility treatment
following DNA transfer.

   The therapy could be controversial for two reasons. It would be the first
medical procedure designed to pass irreversible genetic changes on to future
generations. Other forms of gene therapy only affect the patient.

   Secondly, some critics dislike the idea of children inheriting genetic
material from "three parents" - the father and the mothers who donated nuclear
and mitochondrial DNA.

   But Alison Murdoch, head of Newcastle Fertility Centre, said the
mitochondrial DNA represented a tiny percentage of the human genome and only
affected the cell's energy processes. It would be quite wrong to think of
producing children with two mothers, she said, because "parents are the people
who provide your nuclear genome".

   Copyright The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and
paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.

LOAD-DATE: April 14, 2010


                             1005 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2010 The Financial Times Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                                     FT.com

                       March 19, 2010 Friday 7:10 PM GMT

LENGTH: 614 words

HEADLINE: Kevin Goldstein-Jackson: healthy bets for my pension cash

BYLINE: Kevin Goldstein-Jackson

BODY:

   Iam trying to decide what to do with the large amount of cash in my
self-invested personal pension (Sipp). But it is easier to identify shares to
avoid rather than shares to buy.

   Looking at recent company news, I was not impressed by the appointment of
Adam Crozier as chief executive of ITV. I thought he was overpaid for his
performance as boss of Royal Mail and I hope any bonus he may get at ITV does
not include payment for extra profits not generated by him - such as plans to
allow product placement in programmes. Maybe in 2011/2012, when ITV shares are
much lower, I might be tempted to buy a stake on the possibility of takeover
activity.

   Another company I am avoiding is Prudential. Paying a proposed US$35.5bn
(£23.7bn) for AIG's Asian insurance business seems too much and too risky. To
put that price in perspective, Standard Chartered Bank's market capitalisation
is around £35.1bn - and was less than half that in early 2009. Surely it would
be better to abandon an AIG deal and make Prudential's existing business grow
with increased marketing - or maybe try to form a joint insurance venture in
Asia with Standard Chartered?

   Whatever happens in the world, though, people will still need medicine - and
that's why I'm happy to keep my Sipp overweight in the pharmaceuticals sector. I
have shareholdings in the multinational Novartis and a number of minnows, such
as BTG, Immupharma and Oxford Biomedica.

   Oxford announced its preliminary results for 2009 on March 10. Although
loss-making, it is working on therapies for the treatment of Parkinson's
disease, cancer, motor neuron disease and - of special interest to me - it has
received an "upfront payment" of $26m and committed funding of up to $24m spread
over three years from pharmaceuticals giant Sanofi-Aventis for the development
of gene therapies for a range of eye problems.

   If the Sipp rules allowed it, I'd also be tempted to use a bit of my cash to
place some pre-election bets with the bookies.

   I think the Budget on Wednesday will have a few surprises aimed at persuading
people who currently say "I don't like any party" to vote Labour. A quick
election might follow before all the small print can be fully digested.

   The prime minister has already promised "no new taxes". But will the
chancellor increase existing ones? Maybe he will remind voters of the lingering
influence of former chancellor Kenneth Clarke on the Conservative party.

   Although the earlier Tory chancellor Norman Lamont proposed value added tax
(VAT) on domestic fuel and power, it was Clarke in his 1993 Budget who levied
that tax - initially at 8 per cent from 1994 with the intention to raise it to
17.5 per cent by April 1995. It was only a rebellion within his own party that
prevented the increase. Clarke also created the insurance premium tax on
household, car and other insurance policies. Hardly endearing to the lower paid.

   Whitehall officials have now been preparing a range of financial options for
whichever party wins the election. Disturbingly, one option is said to include
VAT on food and certain other, at present VAT-free, items.

   However, I still expect either a hung parliament or one where the winning
party has such a small majority that, within two years, it collapses due to
internal arguments. And if David Cameron loses, I expect an attempted coup and
calls for him to be replaced by Boris Johnson.

   Kevin Goldstein-Jackson is an active private investor writing about his own
investments. He may have a financial interest in any of the companies and
trading strategies mentioned.

   Copyright The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and
paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.

LOAD-DATE: March 19, 2010


                             1006 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2010 The Financial Times Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                                     FT.com

                    February 10, 2010 Wednesday 12:10 AM GMT

LENGTH: 319 words

HEADLINE: ReNeuron approved for stem cell trial

BYLINE: Clive Cookson, Science Editor

BODY:

   ReNeuron has overcome the final regulatory barrier to treating stroke
patients with stem cells.

   The UK Gene Therapy Advisory Committee granted its approval for the
Guildford-based company to begin a clinical trial with a dozen stroke patients
in Scotland. It will be the world's first human test of stem cell therapy for
strokes.

   John Sinden, ReNeuron chief scientist, told the FT the two-year trial would
begin in the second quarter of 2010, led by Keith Muir, a neurologist at Glasgow
University. Extensive animal tests have shown neural stem cells - derived from
cells that originated several years ago in an aborted human foetus - could help
a damaged brain to regenerate, potentially relieving some symptoms of strokes.

   ReNeuron has travelled down a long regulatory road to get its ReN001 stem
cell therapy approved for clinical trial. The company received a cool response
when it sounded out UK and European regulators in 2005, so it went to the US
instead. But the Food and Drug Administration kept delaying approval.

   In 2008 ReNeuron went back to the UK Medicines and Healthcare Regulatory
Agency, which was more positive the second  time around. In January 2009 the
MHRA gave its approval, but the Gene Therapy Advisory Committee - the national
research ethics body for stem cell clinical trials - has taken a further year to
add its endorsement.

   "This final approval represents the culmination of many months of work in
taking our ReN001 therapy through a regulatory process in the UK largely
untested by other stem cell therapy approaches of this type," said Michael Hunt,
ReNeuron chief executive. "We are therefore pleased to have in many ways
pioneered that regulatory pathway for subsequent cell therapy applications."

   ReNeuron shares on Tuesday rose 0.2p to 6.98p.

   Copyright The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and
paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.

LOAD-DATE: February 9, 2010


                             1007 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2009 The Financial Times Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                                     FT.com

                      December 7, 2009 Monday 3:35 PM GMT

LENGTH: 985 words

HEADLINE: Health in the news

BYLINE: Clive Cookson

BODY:

   Deadly legacy: Wartime camp survivors at risk

   Holocaust survivors are at higher risk of ­cancer later in life, according to
an Israeli study published in the Journal of the ­National Cancer Institute.

   Researchers at the University of Haifa compared the cancer rates among
300,000 Jews who were born in Europe and emigrated to Palestine before the end
of the second world war with those among a matched group that left Europe for
Israel between 1945 and 1989.

   The first group could not have been involved in the Holocaust, while many of
the second group were. Likely exposure to Nazi camps was based on immigration
dates because no individual data was available for actual Holocaust experience.

   The results showed likely exposure was associated with a significantly
increased risk of cancer in all birth groups and for both sexes. The strongest
links were with breast and colorectal cancer. Exposure at a younger age seemed
to be particularly associated with increased cancer risk.

   In an editorial accompanying the paper, Stephen Hursting and Michele Forman
of the University of Texas say the study adds to the evidence on cancer of
temporary starvation, psychological horror and physical hardship. "Data from
studies suggest while [calorie reduction] typically decreases cancer risk, the
anti-cancer effects may be neutralised or overwhelmed in the presence of extreme
stressors."

   ...........................

   Digital plaster: New disposable technology monitors patients' vital signs

   A wireless "digital plaster" that monitors patients' vital signs round the
clock has begun a clinical trial at Imperial College London.

   The Sensium plaster or patch is being developed by Toumaz Technology, an
Imperial spin-off company. Its communications and sensor package runs at
ultra-low power, continuously measuring body temperature, heart rate and
respiration - and transmitting the data to a doctor or nurse, who can quickly
detect any critical change. The data is also fed automatically into the
patient's electronic medical record.

   The disposable plaster sticks to the patient's chest for several days. It is
then ­replaced to maintain infection control.

   The trial will investigate whether the digital plaster provides medical staff
with physiological data as good as that from conventional hospital monitors.

   In the long run, the technology should enable some patients to recover from
­surgery and illness at home rather than in hospital. It should also give
greater mobility to hospital in-patients, and ­allow doctors to extend
continuous monitoring to a broader range of patients.

   Chris Toumazou, chief executive of Toumaz Technology and director of
Imperial's Institute of Biomedical Engineering, says: "We're hoping the plaster
will improve the health and wellbeing of a range of ­patients - from patients on
a ­general ward to people with chronic diseases who want to have their health
monitored."

   ...........................

   Carbon footprint: Not so healthy for the planet

   Healthcare does not usually feature prominently in discussions of carbon
dioxide emissions. But a study published in the Journal of the American Medical
Association shows healthcare accounts for 8 per cent of the US carbon footprint.

   Researchers at the University of Chicago analysed spending in all the
component parts of the health sector to measure its potential impact on global
warming. They used a model called environmental input-output life-cycle
­assessment, which analysed direct ­environmental effects of healthcare
activities as well as indirect effects such as emissions generated in the
production and distribution of drugs.

   Although healthcare is less carbon ­intensive than other ­sectors, the
­authors say an activity ­responsible for ­nearly a 10th of emissions cannot be
ignored.

   "The primary focus is on issues surrounding patient safety, healthcare
quality and cost containment," says Jeanette Chung, lead author.

   "The healthcare sector, in general, may be a bit slower than other sectors to
put [carbon reduction] on its radar screen, but given the focus on healthcare
policy and environmental policy, it might be interesting - if not wise - to
start accounting for environmental externalities in healthcare."

   ...........................

   Eyeing the future: Gene therapy can improve vision

   The eye is turning out to be a good target for gene therapy. The best results
so far have been ­reported from a two-year trial at the Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia, where 12 patients with a rare inherited sight disorder showed a
big improvement when their genetic defect was corrected. The youngest patients
benefited most.

   Jean Bennett and colleagues treated a rare form of inherited retinal
degeneration called Leber's congenital amaurosis (LCA), which causes severe loss
of vision ­during childhood and usually total blindness by the third or fourth
decade of life. There is no treatment at present.

   They selected LCA for clinical study because proof of concept had been
established in animals; the gene responsible was available; the cellular
degeneration is slow enough to provide a reasonably large window of time in
which to intervene; and success could pave the way for gene-based treatments for
more common retinal degenerative diseases.

   The study, reported in the Lancet, involved 12 patients aged between eight
and 44. Each patient had genetic material essential for correction of LCA
injected into the eye with the worst ­vision. It was linked to a harmless virus
that delivered the DNA material to the diseased retinal cells.

   The greatest improvement took place in four children who gained ambulatory
vision (enough sight to walk unaided).

   "The most noteworthy result was the ability of children to navigate an
obstacle course independently and accura-tely, even in dim light," the
researchers say.

   Copyright The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and
paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.

LOAD-DATE: December 7, 2009


                             1008 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2009 The Financial Times Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                                     FT.com

                      November 23, 2009 Monday 3:45 AM GMT

LENGTH: 194 words

HEADLINE: Blood Matters

BYLINE: Review by James Urquhart

BODY:

   Blood MattersBy Masha GessenGranta £8.99, 321 pagesFT Bookshop price: £7.19

   Twelve years after her mother died of breast cancer, 37-year-old Gessen - a
war correspondent and mother at the time - discovered that she had inherited the
"genetic mutation that kills women early". Pursuing the cancer-inducing gene's
lethal path through her Jewish ancestry, Gessen confronts her own massively
increased risk (to about 87 per cent) of breast or ovarian cancer.

   Blood Matters, her courageous memoir, presents a historical overview of the
mutant gene, along with scientific assessments and alarming consultations.
Gessen's use of a Harvard economist to test the rationality of medical
decision-making processes indicates both the rigour of her investigation and the
reality of her perilous situation.

   The author's lucid research pulls in other hereditary conditions and the
practice of pre-marital screening, balancing a tender optimism about her own
traumatic surgical experience with the sobering ethics of evolving genetic
therapy.

   Copyright The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and
paste FT articles and redistribute by email or post to the web.

LOAD-DATE: November 22, 2009


                             1009 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2009 The Financial Times Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                                     FT.com

                     September 14, 2009 Monday 7:50 PM GMT

LENGTH: 663 words

HEADLINE: FTSE hangs on to 11-month high

BYLINE: Bryce Elder and Neil Hume

BODY:

   The FTSE 100 clung on to its 11-month high on Monday but Smith & Nephew
lagged behind the trend.

   The orthopaedics group slipped 1 per cent to 553p, having been lifted last
week by a revival of takeover speculation.

   Cazenove, S&N's joint house broker, was sceptical of the talk. "We believe
there is very little intrasector potential from M&A due to antitrust
considerations," it said.

   Cazenove saw US peer Biomet as the only likely trade buyer. However. Biomet
was taken private at the top of the market and is burdened with too much debt,
the broker said.

   It also questioned whether any company looking to enter the orthopaedics
sector would buy S&N, given that the UK group is trading at a premium to market
leaders Zimmer and Stryker.

   The FTSE 100 recovered from an initial 60-point drop to close 7.38 points
higher at 5,018.85. Volume reflected a thin day for corporate and economic news
with turnover down almost a third on the recent daily average.

   Defence contractors BAE Systems and Cobham led the blue-chip risers.

   The tabular content relating to this article is not available to view.
Apologies in advance for the inconvenience caused.

   BAE, up 2.1 per cent to 339½p, came out among the top picks in a strategy
review from Morgan Stanley, which argued that companies delivering consistent
growth were at an all-time valuation low relative to the wider market.

   The report also highlighted Cobham, up 2.1 per cent to 212¼p, and Intertek,
1.8 per cent higher at £12.34.

   Scottish & Southern Energy advanced 0.5 per cent to £11.59 after HSBC started
coverage with "overweight" based on yield attractions. The broker added that SSE
could buy EDF's UK distribution unit.

   RSA Insurance slipped 0.8 per cent to 126p after management confirmed at an
investor conference that it was looking at a rights issue to fund acquisitions.

   RSA indicated it was looking at targets bigger than bolt-on deals and could
raise about £600m for new opportunities.

   Latin America and Canada were mentioned with UK marine and specialist
commercial operations.

   "Any potential plans by management to make large acquisitions could bring
more risks than benefits," said analysts at KBW.

   Platinum specialist Johnson Matthey lost 1.5 per cent to £14.26. Morgan
Stanley downgraded on valuation grounds as part of a chemicals sector review,
which advised clients to switch into smaller peers, Yule Catto, up 0.7 per cent
to 145p, and Croda, down 1.2 per cent to 666p.

   Trading floor chatter about the prospect of a sweetened bid from Kraft helped
Cadbury rise 1.4 per cent to 786p.

   Shire edged 0.9 per cent higher at £10.46 after an upgrade from MF Global.

   Setting a £14 price target, MF said Shire's human genetic therapies business
alone is worth 800p a share yet is being assigned little value by investors.

   A positive response to last week's interim results and investor meetings
helped lift Wm Morrison by 1 per cent to 285½p.

   BarCap said Morrison could resuscitate a £1bn share buy-back, which it
abandoned last year after spending just £150m.

   UBS closed a short-term "sell" recommendation on Vodafone, up 0.7 per cent to
138½p, citing a lessening of competition in the UK market from the potential
merger between Orange and T-Mobile.

   Leading the mid-caps, IMI gained 4 per cent to 473½p after Citigroup added
the engineer to its "buy" list with a 550p target.

   A possible lifting of the UK ban on product placement failed to support ITV,
down 3.5 per cent to 52½p, with most analysts seeing minimal benefit over the
next few years.

   Two pieces of news expected this week are likely to prove more important,
they said.

   ITV is expected to appoint Tony Ball as its new chief executive and the
Competition Commission is due to deliver its report on the mechanism by which
ITV compensates advertisers when audience share falls.

   Yell lost 6.4 per cent to 68¼p as it awaited news on its refinancing.
Shareholders have reportedly backed plans for a £500m rights issue but
uncertainty remains over whether it can agree terms with its banks.

LOAD-DATE: September 14, 2009


                             1010 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2009 The Financial Times Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                                     FT.com

                     August 26, 2009 Wednesday 5:30 PM GMT

LENGTH: 481 words

HEADLINE: Breakthrough in mitochondrial DNA therapy

BYLINE: Clive Cookson

BODY:

   The tabular content relating to this article is not available to view.
Apologies in advance for the inconvenience caused.

   A powerful but potentially controversial form of gene therapy, which would
prevent a mother passing some inherited diseases on to her child, has been
demonstrated for the first time in monkeys.

   The technique, developed at Oregon Health and Science University in the US,
would remove the risk of transmitting disease through "mitochondrial DNA". This
is the genetic material contained in mitochondria - tiny energy-producing
structures that power the cell's activities.

   Although only a tiny fraction of human DNA resides in mitochondria rather
than the main genome inside the cell's nucleus, mitochondrial mutations are
responsible for 150 known diseases and affect about one in 200 children, said
Shoukhrat Mitalipov, one of the Oregon researchers.

   "We believe this discovery in nonhuman primates can rapidly be translated
into human therapies aimed at preventing inherited disorders passed from mothers
to their children through the mitochondrial DNA, such as certain forms of
cancer, diabetes, infertility, myopathies and neurodegenerative diseases," Dr
Mitalipov added.

   The procedure, published online in the journal Nature, is similar to the
"nuclear transfer" technique used to clone animals. It involves transferring the
nucleus from an egg with defective mitochondrial DNA to another egg with healthy
mitochondrial DNA, from which the nucleus has been removed. The latter is then
fertilised with donor sperm and implanted in a surrogate female, using standard
IVF methods.

   The Oregon scientists' initial implantation of two embryos resulted in the
birth of healthy twin monkeys, called Mito and Tracker (see picture).

   "We believe that with the proper government approvals, our work can rapidly
be translated into clinical trials for humans," said Dr Mitalipov.

   But, as Nature points out in an editorial accompanying the scientific paper,
demonstrating that the procedure can be carried out safely in people "will
require research that is likely to be contentious - and in many countries
legally or practically impossible."

   For a start, regulators are reluctant to approve "germline" gene therapy,
such as transplanting mitochondrial DNA, which would be passed on to future
generations. Existing gene therapy only affects the patient who is treated.

   Then some groups have ethical objections to creating human embryos for
research. And there are practical problems in obtaining enough human eggs to
carry out the procedure.

   Even so, Duane Alexander, director of the US National Institute of Child
Health and Human Development, which funded the Oregon research, said: "Pending
further research, the findings hold the potential of allowing a couple to have a
child who is biologically their own, but is free of any conditions associated
with defects in maternal mitochondria."

LOAD-DATE: August 26, 2009


                             1011 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2009 The Financial Times Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                                     FT.com

                       June 23, 2009 Tuesday 7:00 PM GMT

LENGTH: 670 words

HEADLINE: Equities exposure catches up with Legal & General

BYLINE: Bryce Elderand Neil Hume

BODY:

   The London market's drift towards two-month lows caught up with Legal &
General yesterday, which led the blue-chip fallers.

   The insurer's shares, which have doubled since early March, lost 7.9 per cent
to 55.8p after Société Générale said the rally had left it looking expensive
versus peers. The broker moved to a "sell" rating and slashed its 2009 profit
estimate by 80 per cent.

   The tabular content relating to this article is not available to view.
Apologies in advance for the inconvenience caused.

   "L&G still has the highest exposure to equities among the UK life stocks we
cover," said SocGen analyst Michael van Wegen.

   "In addition, L&G has lower provisions against bond defaults. These two
factors support our view that L&G is the highest risk stock in the group and
thus merits a discount."

   L&G's performance was at odds with the rest of the sector, with RSA Insurance
ticking up 0.1 per cent to 124.3p and Aviva 0.9 per cent easier at 326p after
its recent hybrid debt issue led Citigroup to upgrade.

   The debt refinancing, a disposal and the market recovery since March mean
Aviva's capital position no longer looks vulnerable, said Citi.

   Mixed signals on the US economy left the wider market directionless. The FTSE
100 closed 4.03 points lower at 4,230.02.

   Tui Travel was the leading riser, up 3.9 per cent to 233½p, after its
management gave an upbeat presentation to the sales desk at Credit Suisse.

   Thomson Reuters' move to delist from the London Stock Exchange. drove its
stock 3.6 per cent higher to £16.90. If approved, shareholders will swap London
for Toronto stock, which started the day at a 9 per cent premium.

   Analysts expected little US stock to flow back, given that UK shareholders
total just 5 per cent of the shareholder base and the company will be buying
back stock to absorb the impact.

   Nevertheless, SocGen argued that some UK cash may be reinvested in sector
peer Reed Elsevier, up 1.7 per cent to 460¼p.

   The demise of Setanta helped British Sky Broadcasting put on 3.1 per cent to
444½p. Investors welcomed Sky's deal to gain control of pricing and billing for
the football rights taken up by ESPN.

   Deutsche Bank described the Disney-backed broadcaster as a financially
stronger competitor, but also a more rational one. "ESPN won't bid for what they
can't monetise. Setanta did," it said.

   Supermarkets were buoyed by robust industry sales data for June. Wm Morrison,
up 1.8 per cent to 244¼p, showed the fastest growth while an improved showing
from Tesco helped it advance 1.7 per cent to 362.6p.

   Shirerose 2.2 per cent to 828½p after JPMorgan highlighted the potential of
its genetic therapies business, which it said was set to become the best growth
driver beyond 2010.

   Shire has a pipeline of rare disease treatments that are not reflected in the
valuation, JPMorgan's team said. Citi was also positive on the stock after
hosting a conference call with a specialist on Gaucher disease; Shire has
late-stage trial results due in September for its Gaucher treatment.

   Among the fallers, Vodafoneeased 0.6 per cent to 117.8p after Standard &
Poor's revised its credit rating outlook to negative based on emerging-market
risk. The agency also highlighted upcoming spectrum auctions in India and
Europe.

   Thomas Cook was 3.4 per cent lower at 200p amid talk that potential buyers
were being sounded out to buy most of the majority stake formerly held by
Arcandor.

   Among the mid-caps, Yell lost 5.9 per cent to 24p on growing uncertainty
about how the directories publisher can refinance debt.

   Pubs group Mitchells & Butlersrose 1.6 per cent to 250¼p after rebel
shareholders John Magnier and J.P. McManus raised their stake to 17.6 per cent.

   An upgrade from Morgan Stanley helped lift sector rival JD Wetherspoonby 6
per cent to 391½p.

   Moving from "underweight" to "overweight", Morgan Stanley argued that the
stock had suffered "rights issue fatigue" because of sector cash calls.

   It argued that Wetherspoon did not need refinancing and offered strong and
stable cash generation with potential for upgrades.

LOAD-DATE: June 23, 2009


                             1012 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2009 The Financial Times Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                                     FT.com

                        May 7, 2009 Thursday 9:35 AM GMT

LENGTH: 1524 words

HEADLINE: David Stevenson: Blog on contrarianism

BODY:

   Thursday 7 May, 2009:

   Just received a link to this excellent blog from a fund manager friend - it's
called the Psy Fi blog and its a UK based commentary that tries to blend
psychological insight into the investment process.

   This blog on contrarianism gets to the very heart of the debate about
investing - it accepts that by and large markets are 'normal' (maybe even
efficient) but that in many situations the market (a complex adaptive system )
does go 'off-centre' and behave in ways that allow investors to capture abnormal
profits. But that capturing process is incredibly difficult and requires
enormous patience. As a companion piece I'd also suggest looking at James
Montier's piece on the Tao of Investing.

   Here is the link

   Sunday, 3 May 2009

   Contrarianism

   Don't Drive The Wrong Way Up One-Way Streets

   We often hear that it pays an investor to be contrarian but, in reality, what
does that mean? Running against the herd is, in the real world, usually a
desperately stupid thing to do - driving the wrong way up one way streets or
wagering blindly against the odds on horseracing are not strategies that should
recommend themselves to any even half-way rational person.

   So if contrarianism doesn't simply mean doing the opposite of what everyone
else does but is, somehow, the key to successful investing, what is it? What's
the magic formula that tells us when we should and when we shouldn't bet against
the markets?

   Beware, Faulty EMH Ahoy

   Contrarianism is, in itself, an assumption that the Efficient Markets
Hypothesis (EMH) doesn't work. In reality most investors implicitly accept this,
even while the majority of our academic institutions continue to operate as
though it's a natural law. It's like teaching our kids that Creationism is
correct while the professors work on gene therapy.

   Just because EMH is faulty, though, doesn't mean it's easy to exploit it.
Firstly markets do behave normally (in both statistical and common parlance)
most of the time. Inefficiencies are either arbitraged away or are fundamentally
difficult to exploit for smaller retail investors. In such times there isn't
much money to be made being contrary at a gross market level. Quite the
opposite.

   Secondly, when markets do go badly awry it's usually because of some kind of
crisis, the outcome of which isn't easily predictable. These are the points at
which expectations become divorced from fundamentals because it's very difficult
to know what the latter are. The trick, if you're a contrarian, is to pick these
points and then set yourself a sufficient margin of safety as markets overreact.

   The Wisdom of Crowds

   That markets do overreact tells us something interesting about the nature of
humans: it suggests that somehow collective human rationality is being overcome
by group effects. It also runs contrary to one of the fundamental tenets of EMH
- that humans are not rational but because they act independently their
irrationality cancels out.

   Well, it's perfectly obvious - given that markets do exhibit inefficiencies,
and sometimes for quite a long time - that this assumption must be flawed. The
question is why is it flawed and how does this help us become better,
contrarian, investors?

   This assumption of irrationality being cancelled out underpins the concept of
the Wisdom of Crowds, so smartly summarised by James Surowiecki in his eponymous
book. The phenomenon was first noted by Frederick Galton back at the beginning
of the twentieth century and essentially suggests that as long as people act
independently of each other the sum of their guesses can produce a better result
than any individual guess - aka the EMH.

   Counterintuitive this may be, but it seems to be broadly correct. The key is
that the individuals must genuinely be acting independently. Dependencies may be
hidden - so, for instance, asking an indigenous population for their views on
immigration won't yield an independent result in a blind vote because voters
will already have shared views based on a whole variety of social factors.

   (Although, interestingly, research suggests that the type of immigrants
you'll be against will depend on your own economic self-interest.)

   Complex Emergent Systems

   In stockmarkets, of course, we don't have a blind vote. The prices of shares
indicate the current state of investor belief and we often find examples where
shares have been marked up or down to an extent that doesn't seem to make sense
unless there's some inside knowledge at work or investors are being driven by
group effects.

   The shape of these behaviours is similar to the type of outcomes seen in a
class of systems known as complex adaptive systems. In these the outcomes - the
behaviours - are "emergent" and arise out of the interactions between the
various agents acting within the system. The agents in the stockmarket are, of
course, the humans and the interactions are all of those numerous information
flows between us. Everything from tipsheets to bulletin boards to analyst
recommendations and even share prices themselves.

   Emergent systems are brutally complex - you can't understand them by the
classic process of reductionism, breaking everything down into its constituent
parts. Ask any human what's happening in the markets and they'll basically have
no idea (although virtually every investor will have an opinion) yet the overall
market behaviour emerges from the interactions between the human investors.

   Contrarianism and Timing

   If you accept that modelling stockmarkets based on complex adaptive systems
seems to make sense then the next step is to figure out when it pays to be a
contrarian. Clearly most of the time markets - at the gross level - are fairly
efficient. Yet sometimes they're not - the output of the adaptive system goes
awry. So what's happening?

   It's the idea that underpins the Wisdom of Crowds that's being violated -
investors stop behaving independently and irrationally and start behaving
dependently and irrationally. It's not the irrationality that's the problem, but
the interdependence. Can this happen? You'd better believe it.

   Social psychology is full of examples showing individuals aligning their
responses with the group even when the group's view is clearly wrong going back
to the Asch conformity experiments in the 1950's. We have a powerful inclination
to want to be part of a group - for good evolutionary reasons since being part
of a group, no matter how stupid, misguided and irrational, provides us better
protection than being correct, lonely and likely to be eaten by the next hungry
carnivore that happens along.

   Peak Fear and Greed

   Unfortunately being contrarian at the market level is awfully difficult. When
these periodic breakdowns in market efficiency occur the group effects will be
at their maximum. You're looking at moments of peak greed and fear, the very
points at which herd behaviour is the most rational for socially organised
creatures in a dangerous environment.

   A second problem, which dogs the professional investment industry in
particular but which is also an issue for individual investors, is that
contrarianism, even when correct, takes time to work. Rationality doesn't
reassert itself overnight and markets can, as Keynes is famously misquoted as
saying, "stay irrational longer than investors can stay solvent".

   The fund management industry faces real issues with this. Fund managers have
a short-term need to generate fees, which mitigates against taking a longer term
approach to generate better fund returns. They're also incentivised to be
successful in the short-term, with both bonuses and their jobs on the line. In
such an environment it's hard to see how fund managers can be contrarian.

   For individual investors the problem is being able to divorce themselves from
the social group effects sufficiently to be able to take advantage of market
breaks. It's also all too easy to get sucked into the idea that going against
the market is good for its own sake. It's not, it's dangerous. A stock may be
cheap because it's fallen a long way, but it may not be - a stock that's fallen
99% can still fall another 100%.

   Go Long Term, Contrarian or Not

   Deciding when markets are being irrational is, in part, a judgement call and
in part down to detailed analysis. Even when markets are in their normal, nearly
rational mode, longer term contrarian investing opportunities will arise with
specific companies, usually smaller ones. This is the normal warp and weft of
value investing which you don't get right without proper fundamental analysis
and a judgement about a margin of safety.

   The alternative to contrarianism is, of course, to simply ignore short-term
oscillations in the market and to invest through thick and thin. Regular drip
feeding into passive funds will, in fact, capture some outperformance due to the
larger stakes bought while markets are unduly pessimistic - although this
advantage will partially be removed by also buying at overly optimistic times.
Still, it's a simple strategy if you don't want to risk your mortal sole on
being contrarian.

   David Stevenson is also one of the Four Wise Monkeys at the online TV
investment programme www.4wm.co.uk

   adventurous@ft.com

LOAD-DATE: May 7, 2009


                             1013 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2008 The Financial Times Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                                     FT.com

                        July 4, 2008 Friday 12:20 AM GMT

LENGTH: 351 words

HEADLINE: Shire pays out £260m for Jerini

BYLINE: Salamander Davoudi

BODY:

   Shire, the FTSE 100 specialist pharmaceuticals company, on Thursday widened
its footprint in human genetic therapies with the acquisition of Jerini, the
German biotechnology company, for EUR328m (£260m).

   The deal is the latest in a series of high-priced transactions in which
larger drug companies have paid substantial premiums to acquire biotechnology
companies to shore up their pipelines.

   The acquisition gives Shire access to Firazyr, Jerini's lead product for the
treatment of hereditary angioedema, which is characterised by acute attacks of
painful swelling in the hands, feet, face, larynx, and abdomen.

   Shire will pay EUR6.25 per share in cash for each Jerini share, a 71 per cent
premium to the Berlin-based company's price at close of business on Wednesday.

   In addition Shire will invest EUR21m in newly issued Jerini shares in order
to provide the company with enough cash to start the imminent launch of Firazyr
in Europe.

   Shares in Shire rose 11p, to 811p, giving it a £4.54bn market capitalisation.

   Karl Bradshaw, analyst at Morgan Stanley, said: "We believe this acquisition
makes sense and fits well with Shire's continued strategy to expand its human
genetic therapy business."

   Shire said it would fund the deal out of its cash reserves and the company
expects the acquisition to boost earnings by the second half of 2010.

   Firazyr is forecast to have peak annual global sales of $350m (£176m) to
$400m and Angus Russell, chief executive, said it complemented Shire's focus on
drugs that can be marketed to specialist doctors using a small sales force.

   Last May, Firazyr was recommended for marketing approval by the European
Medicines Agency. However, the US Food and Drug Administration rejected the
drug's initial application in April. Shire said it was confident the US would
eventually approve the drug.

   Firazyr is expected to go on sale in Europe this year. The drug has been
granted an orphan status. This will protect it against competition for some
time.

   Hereditary angioedema is estimated to affect one in 50,000 people, with about
10,000 patients in the EU and 7,000 in the US and Canada.

LOAD-DATE: July 3, 2008


                             1014 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2008 The Financial Times Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                                     FT.com

                        June 23, 2008 Monday 9:45 PM GMT

LENGTH: 679 words

HEADLINE: London's four-day losing streak broken

BYLINE: Bryce Elder and Neil Hume

BODY:

   The London market broke a four-day losing streak, but real estate stocks such
as Land Securitieswere sidelined.

   The sector was on offer after HSBC predicted that prime property rents would
fall by 15-35 per cent by the end of next year, and forecast several companies
would cut their dividends.

   "We believe that it is too early to look through the downturn with the market
pricing in average portfolio falls of 14 per cent while our forecast is for an
average 23 per cent portfolio fall," analyst John Fraser-Andrews told clients.

   He downgraded Land Securities, off 4.8 per cent to £12.75 to "underweight"
and repeated the same call on Hammerson, lower by 1.5 per cent to 902½p and
British Land, down 21p to 745p.

   Meanwhile, Liberty International was down 2.6 per cent to 881p as Citigroup
moved to a "sell" rating on valuation late in the day.

   The FTSE 100 closed up 46.4 points at 5,667.2 as a stronger oil price buoyed
commodity stocks such as BP, up 1.8 per cent to 574¾p.

   British Energy, down 0.5 per cent to 703p, was among the day's main
speculative features. The talk was that Draxmight acquire the government's 35.2
per cent stake in British Energy. That could set up a white knight merger
involving Drax and Centrica, traders said.

   EDF said last week it was not prepared to pay more than about £7 a share for
British Energy, which has signalled that 735p would be its preferred price.

   There were reasons to doubt the tale. Drax, up 1.6 per cent to 730p, was
valued at just £2.5bn compared with the government's £4bn asking price on its
British Energy stake. Centrica, up 2.4 per cent to 316¼p, is reported to have
agreed with EDF to be a minority partner if the French group succeeds.

   Among the banks, HBOS closed down 4.3 per cent to 270¼p amid growing
speculation that the bank could be forced to reprice its £4bn rights issue.
Shareholders are due to vote on the 275p cash call on Thursday.

   Separately, Harbinger Capital Partners disclosed a 3.29 per cent short
position in HBOS. Lloyds TSB faded 2.7 per cent to 318¾p following speculation
it could bid £6bn for for Allianz's Dresdner Bank unit.

   Shire was the top blue-chip performer, up 5.7 per cent to 842½p after Goldman
Sachs added the drugmaker to its "conviction buy" list.

   Vyvanse, Shire's next generation hyperactivity treatment, should gain market
share after the company started promoting the drug to adults, Goldman said.
Moreover, it argued that investor focus on disappointing Vyvanse prescriptions
had obscured the sizeable and growing contribution of human genetic therapies to
the earnings line.

   Tate & Lyle was up 4.9 per cent to 392½p on news of a takeover approach for a
rival sweetener and starch maker.

   Bunge agreed to buy Corn Products International, the fourth-largest
manufacturer of high fructose corn sweeteners in the US, for $4.8bn in stock.
That offer equated to about nine times Corn's underlying earnings, compared with
Tate on about seven times. Traders also noted that Harbinger, Tate's largest
shareholder with 16.2 per cent, also has a 5.9 per cent holding in Corn.

   Compassrose 3.1 per cent to 369½p after Société Générale started coverage of
the caterer with a "buy" rating and 415p target price.

   Housebuilders were under pressure after the latest survey from Rightmove
showed that asking prices of homes stood just 0.1 per cent higher than a year
ago, cooling from a 2.2 per cent rise in May.

   Persimmon lost 4.3 per cent to 355p on its first day since being relegated
from the FTSE 100. Quintain Estates fell 9.1 per cent to 227¼p and Taylor Wimpey
slid 7.2 per cent to 64¾p.

   888 Holdings, the online casino, inched up 0.3 per cent to 145½p amid talk it
might bid for Fluxx, a gambling software developer listed in Germany.

   Product testing companyIntertek gained 0.7 per cent to £10.55 after Wolfhart
Hauser, its chief executive, told a Goldman Sachs industry conference that there
had been no slowdown in key markets. He also confirmed that Intertek was
investigating a bid for the testing division of Bodycote, up 1.1 per cent to
222¼p, but did not consider it a strategic asset worth chasing.

LOAD-DATE: June 23, 2008


                             1015 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2008 The Financial Times Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                                     FT.com

                      June 11, 2008 Wednesday 6:30 PM GMT

LENGTH: 1392 words

HEADLINE: Japan's quest for innovative freedom

BYLINE: Jonathan Guthrie and Robin Harding

BODY:

   Nodding politely, a mechanical doll created by Toshiba founder Hisahige
Tanaka totters across a tabletop and offers a visitor a cup of tea at the
company's research and development centre near Tokyo. Ingenious and intriguing,
the automaton was produced in the 19th century, portending the renaissance in
Japanese applied technology that followed the second world war. This delivered
such consumer boons as Toshiba laptops, Toyota cars and Nintendo games.

   Now Japan is questioning whether its innovation system can serve it as well
in the 21st century as in the 20th. There are doubts over whether Japan's
Y18,000bn ($168bn,EUR108bn, £86bn) annual R&D budget is well spent. Reformers
want an environment that is more entrepreneurial and less dominated by big
companies. Corporate R&D bosses and academics are struggling to put aside
long-standing grudges.

   If Japan were a technology company it would be worried about its pipeline.
The job of replenishing this has traditionally fallen to big corporations such
as Toshiba. Ichiro Tai, a jolly, bespectacled man who runs Toshiba's R&D centre,
says: "We have 1,000 researchers and they should have far more ideas. The number
of patents [one each a year] is far too small."

   Dissatisfaction is as much a management tool for Mr Tai as it is for a sales
boss driving his team towards ever-higher targets. Tosh-iba could nevertheless
do with some high-profile breakthroughs after losing its battle with Sony to set
the standard for high definition video players. Mr Tai duly shows off hopeful
new technologies to awed visitors. One is a system that uses quantum physics
effects to encrypt data. Another is a battery that can be recharged in five
minutes which could be used to power electric vehicles.

   Mr Tai muses that greater freedom could spur the creativity of company
research staff. Yet Toshiba is characteristic of Japanese technology companies
in protecting its elite scientists from commercial pressures more than many
western ones. The electronics group, which had sales of about Y7,000bn in the
year to March 2007, uses a tripartite structure. The R&D centre and its academic
satellites do blue-sky research. A second tier of labs commercialise new
technologies. A third layer engages in the nitty-gritty of improving existing
products within business units.

   Politicians and bureaucrats are now asking whether Japan is over-reliant on
such corporate ideas factories. Like every country with a decent science base,
Japan envies the global success of Microsoft in PC operating systems and Google
in internet search. Surely, the argument runs, Japan would produce new global
gorillas of its own if its innovation system were more like that of the US.

   The Japanese government has accordingly announced a Y100bn venture fund to
invest in fledgling technology businesses. The idea is to encourage more private
and institutional investors to pump their money into start-ups too.

   However, there are formidable barriers to injecting some of the pep of
Silicon Valley into the commercialisation of new technology in Japan. The
biggest is that Japan does not have an Anglo Saxon-style enterprise culture.
Would-be entrepreneurs have few role models apart from Masayoshi Son, founder of
communications group Softbank. Aspiring to become very wealthy is regarded as
faintly unJapanese.

   Equally, "business failure is seen as shameful in Japan, though that
perception is beginning to erode", says Seiichi Yoshikawa of Nippon Keidanren,
Japan's powerful business lobby. When new technology ventures fail, it tends to
be as units of large corporations, rather than as standalone companies. This
cushions the impact. The downside of the system is that it can suppress maverick
talent.

   At Japan's ministry of economy, trade and industry, Yuji Tokumasu, who works
on science and technology policy, is fretting over a parallel problem. According
to a chart he brandishes, even as Japan's spending on research and development
has soared in the past 20 years, value added in the manufacturing sector has
stagnated.

   Japan already spends more than 3 per cent of its gross domestic product on
R&D - more than any other country. One way of reading the chart is to surmise
that diminishing returns have set in, that every extra yen spent on R&D goes to
employ less talented researchers, who study less promising approaches to the
same problems. Japanese universities' poor record on turning research funding
into results published by top scientific journals suggests that government money
can be more efficiently spent. It could be that rather than spending too little
on R&D, Japan spends too much.

   However, Mr Tokumasu and others in the technology establishment take heart
from R&D expenditure data. If only Japan could convert all of this spending into
scientific breakthroughs, new businesses and saleable products, they argue, it
would prove a powerful source of economic growth.

   The country has a world-class science base, as exemplified by Shinya Yamanaka
of Kyoto University. In 2006 Professor Yamanaka created cells resembling
embryonic stem cells from other tissue in mice. Last year, in parallel with US
researchers, he repeated the feat for humans. The technique has huge potential
to advance gene therapy, given moral strictures on using real embryonic cells.
Prof Yamanaka has a chance of winning a Nobel Prize.

   But businesses can be impeded from working with university researchers such
as Prof Yamanaka by historically chilly relations. During the growth years of
the 1960s and 1970s, corporations sought independence in R&D. Public service
anti-corruption rules made it difficult for academics to hobnob with business
people. It is telling that two of Toshiba's most important academic
collaborations are with British universities - Cambridge and Bristol.

   In 2004 universities were incorporated and gained ownership of the
intellectual property created in their laboratories. The change irritated some
people. "Before, they got research for free," says Takafumi Yamamoto,
plain-speaking boss of Todai TLO, Tokyo University's licensing organisation.

   Mr Yamamoto believes the dominant role of large corporations in business life
is weakening. Partly thanks to entrepreneurship education "young people do not
all want to be soldiers for big companies", he says. Flotations of university
spin-outs have increased enthusiasm for the commercialisation of research among
academics. They are meanwhile likely to become more assertive in protecting
their intellectual property rights following the establishment of a new division
of the High Court specialising in IPR. Mr Yamamoto says: "There could be an
increasing number of cases brought by the universities against the companies."

   So is traditional Japanese consensus under threat? Not according to Yutaka
Asai, chief technology officer of Oki, the telecoms and printers group, who
neatly reconciles the spat between business and universities. Companies may wind
up with a smaller share of revenues from individual academic collaborations, he
says. But, at the same time, a fairer division of the spoils should prompt more
tie-ins, making everyone better off.

   A 'technique' for managing academics is vital for collaboration

   Yukinori Kida, owner of a small Toyko-based components business, has some
advice for big Japanese companies forging collaborations with universities.
Making it work depends on "technique" in managing academics, he says.

   Innovation has helped KDA keep going in the face of Chinese competition. Six
years ago, with help from the University of Tokyo, the company found a better
way of moulding the ceramic bolts used in equipment exposed to high
temperatures. The breakthrough allowed Mr Kida to cut costs and won him a
valuable market niche.

   KDA, which employs 50 staff including Kaori, Mr Kida's daughter and expected
successor, made a profit of Y30m on sales of Y1bn last year. It is now working
on new plastics and ceramics moulding methods with researchers from Tokyo and
Nagoya universities. "In three years we hope to double sales," Mr Kida says.

   KDA spends a healthy 3 per cent of sales revenue on new product development.
Mr Kida uses students as researchers, believing they are open-minded as well as
cheaper: "University professors are strong on narrow subject areas, but if you
need to study a problem from a new perspective, they are really not that good."

LOAD-DATE: June 11, 2008


                             1016 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2008 The Financial Times Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                                     FT.com

                       April 25, 2008 Friday 5:15 AM GMT

LENGTH: 1402 words

HEADLINE: Affordable sunshine

BYLINE: Robert Liebman

BODY:

   In the late 1950s, the General Development Corporation bought up vast swathes
of former agricultural land in southeastern Florida around the St Lucie River.
The owners, the Mackle brothers - Elliott, Robert and Frank Jr - divided these
vast tracts into thousands of quarter-acre lots.

   The Mackles marketed the lots mostly to modest-income families in the north.
The ten-dollar price tag hit the spot. The three brothers prospered and hundreds
of ordinary Americans became landowners.

   But not homeowners, not yet. These pioneer landowners couldn't build in Port
St Lucie even if they wanted or could afford to. Although PSL incorporated as a
city as early as 1961, it was little more than a village, and threadbare at
that. Roads and residential infrastructure - water, electricity and sewage
disposal - were scarce to non-existent.

   There were almost no people either, a few hundred at most, served by a 7-11
convenience store. The alternative meant a trip to nearby Stuart or Fort Pierce.

   Forty years later, the official 2000 census stated Port St Lucie's population
at 89,000, and four years after that, it soared to 118,000. This 12 per cent
annual increase earned it the title of America's fastest-growing large city.
Today's total is 165,000 and rising, and plenty of land is still available.

   Rapid growth was inevitable. The quarter-acre plots didn't stay undeveloped
forever. Eventually the absentee owners retired, moved to their plots and built
homes. Gradually, the city added roads and vital services.

   As Port St Lucie became more viable, relatively low house prices attracted
commuters who worked in West Palm Beach 40 miles south of the area. A virtuous
circle ensued: more civic improvements attracted more and wealthier newcomers,
and in their wake still more and better shops and services arrived.

   Port St Lucie is on Florida's Atlantic coast, about 120 miles north of Miami.
Orlando is roughly the same distance to the north. The gulf stream brings
cooling breezes in summer.

   The city is not directly on the Atlantic but it counts a 20-mile stretch of
unspoiled beaches as a near neighbour. And between PSL and the ocean is another
major amenity, the Indian River. Extending northward for more than 100 miles,
this narrow intracoastal waterway supports an extraordinary variety of fish and
other wildlife, and is a magnet for anglers, sailors, snorkelers and bird- and
manatee-watchers. It offers calm gulf-like water on the ocean side of the state.

   Port St Lucie now has plenty of schools, supermarkets, restaurants and
recreational facilities - and running water. Homes are mostly that suburban
American icon, the ranch: spacious single-storey single-family homes with
pitched roofs and an integral garage. Also available are two-storey Key
West-style homes with long porches, often on both levels, that are ideal for
enjoying the Gulf Stream breeze.

   Family homes are available for under $100,000, and three-bed ranch homes of
1600 sq ft typically cost $200,000. Some of its largest, most exclusive homes
sell for $2m or more, but they are few in number, and seven-digit price tags are
rare.

   Current property stock also includes palatial residences in riverside
residential golf and yacht clubs, with golf courses designed by Jack Nicklaus,
Arnold Palmer and Nick Price. Oceanside condominiums are available in Hutchinson
Island.

   New house styles are appearing in new communities. The Toll Brothers are
building 188 "Mediterranean-style" homes in a 90-acre gated enclave on the
city's west side. Small homes start at about $400,000 for the house only. The
plot and options can add $100,000 or more to the final price.

   Yet Port St Lucie has remained true to its modest roots, more Wal-Mart than
Valentino. Budget homes and McMansions alike are considerably cheaper than
comparable properties in Florida's posher, better known towns and cities such as
Sarasota, Naples and Vero Beach.

   The combination of price and quality of life lured Elizabeth and Doug Jones,
both 37, to Port St Lucie from Miami nearly two years ago.

   "Property prices in Miami were outrageous, whereas Port St Lucie was
reasonable, and more laid back" says Elizabeth, an immigration lawyer. "In Port
St Lucie, insurance is cheaper, the cost of living is lower, and our overall
standard and quality of life is higher. I return home from work at a reasonable
hour, and on weekends we go boating or sightseeing or visit friends in Orlando
or Miami."

   For them, falling property values in the area are not a major concern.
"Houses like ours sell today for $315,000 to $325,000. We paid a bit more," she
notes. But she feels that their four bedrooms will allow them to wait out the
downturn if and when they need more space. Their first child, Valerie, was born
eight months ago.

   It is anyone's guess when the US housing market will fully recover, and
estate agent Sheri Wetzel's guess is the November presidential election at the
earliest. "The currently market is saturated," says Wetzel, past president of
the Builders Association and broker-owner of Re/Max Midway. "In St Lucie County
at large, more than 11,000 properties are for sale not including new
construction, but we are selling only between 400 and 600 per month."

   In Port St Lucie itself, which has about 37,000 homes, the Multiple Listing
Service shows more than 4,500 for sale. "We have at least two years' inventory.
Prices dropped about 10 per cent in 2007 and are now falling closer to 20 per
cent."

   Estate agent Scott Wingfield of Coldwell Banker concurs. "Inventory is still
very high, and it may take up to three years for prices to level off. But I
detect a bit of a bounce recently, as if buyers sense that the falls were too
steep, an overreaction. They are starting to take advantage. Our buyers are West
Palm Beach commuters, first timers, local businesspeople and investors.

   But subprime's tentacles are still spreading poison far and wide. There has
been a number of foreclosures and "short sales" in which lenders accept less
than the outstanding debt to spare themselves and the owners the agony and
expense of foreclosure.

   Perhaps of more concern is the the number of builders that have gone bust or
left town, sometimes abandoning homes and projects not yet finished. Toll
Brothers have more than 100 homes to shift at its new site and it is no longer
setting a completion target date. America's largest builder of luxury homes, the
company recently reported third-quarter profits down nearly 85 per cent.

   The Toll Brothers development is in a new part of town called Tradition,
which is itself incomplete. But it is emblematic of an ambitious city determined
to continuing growing via its own economic base.

   Located on the land-rich west side of the city, Tradition is a master-planned
community that currently has several thousand homes on about 3,000 acres. It is
aiming for 18,500 homes and can annex an additional 8,000 acres. Built to New
Urbanist principles, it has masses of family-friendly parks and open spaces as
well as that rarity in Florida, pedestrian-friendly sidewalks. Every year in
March, the major-league New York Mets baseball team decamp to their
spring-training ground in Tradition.

   This burgeoning community is also well on its way to becoming the city's
future employment centre. The California-based Torrey Pines Institute for
Molecular Studies will open a major laboratory in Port St Lucie next year.

   "The biotechs want out of Southern California," says Ed Cunningham, spokesman
for PSL's City Council. "Homes that cost $750,000 in San Diego cost only
$250,000 here. The whole state of Florida wants to attract the biotech industry,
to create a biotech hub here along the lines of a Silicon Valley."

   One firm does not a hub make, but dividends have already arrived: "Torrey
Pines told us that spinoff companies would also come here," adds Cunningham.
"Medical entrepreneur Alfred E. Mann intends to build 400,000 square feet of
labs and offices, and Oregon Health and Science University's Vaccine and Gene
Therapy Institute will also locate here."

   Today, as in the days of the Mackle Brothers, affordable sunshine is still a
big draw. Every month 1400 newcomers arrive in Port St Lucie. As recently as
1970, the total population barely nudged 300.

   ......................................

   Details

   Estate agenciesRe/Max Midway, tel: +1 772 467-9098;
www.midwayrealty.netColdwell Banker/Thomas J White realty, tel: +1 772 340-4000;
www.thomasjwhiterealty.com

LOAD-DATE: April 25, 2008
