
                               1 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1999 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                     December 28, 1999, Tuesday, Edition 1

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 355 words

HEADLINE: CELL TRANSPLANT PRODUCES SPERM

BYLINE: Randolph E. Schmid

BODY:




    ASSOCIATED PRESS

    WASHINGTON - Researchers have successfully transplanted cells that
eventually develop into sperm, giving new hope of fatherhood to young males who
undergo cancer treatments that damage their reproductive potential.

    A team of researchers led by Ralph Brinster of the University of
Pennsylvania School of Veterinary Medicine, in Philadelphia, was able to
transplant the stem cells from one type of mouse into another.

    The cells then developed into sperm cells, carrying the traits of the donor
male, the researchers found.

    The findings, developed in a study of whether fertility can be restored in
infertile males, are reported in today's issue of the journal Nature Medicine.

    While the work was done only in mice, it could have major implications for
some young human cancer victims, Howard Cooke of Western General Hospital in
Edinburgh, Scotland, reports in an accompanying news article.

    Because some cancer treatments can cause mutations in developing and mature
sperm cells, men undergoing these treatments often have sperm removed and frozen
for later use.

    This cannot be done for boys who have not yet gone through puberty since
they have no mature sperm cells.

    Cooke and colleague Philippa Saunders say that Brinster's work indicates
that if immature stem cells can develop successfully after transplantation, they
can be frozen and reintroduced into the donor after completion of cancer
treatment.

    'Ethical problems with this approach abound'

    Frozen preservation ''of testicular stem cells and post-treatment
reintroduction, could protect germ cells from potentially (mutation causing)
cancer treatments and safeguard against infertility,'' Cooke and Saunders
concluded in their study.

    However, they caution, care needs to be taken to avoid reintroduction of
cancer cells into the patient in this process.

    They also noted that the ability to separate, preserve and reintroduce stem
cells raises the possibility of using gene therapy to correct genetic problems.

    ''Ethical problems with this approach abound,'' they said.


LOAD-DATE: December 28, 1999


                               2 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1999 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                      December 10, 1999, Friday, Edition 1

SECTION: LIFE

LENGTH: 664 words

BODY:

    Babies' vulnerability to ear infections appears largely
 inherited, according to a new study that suggests doctors might
 want to closely watch siblings of children prone to such
 ailments. Researchers tracked 168 sets of newborn twins and seven
 sets of newborn triplets for two years and found that identical
 siblings suffer far more similar rates of recurrent middle ear
 effusion - a buildup of fluid that can impede hearing and speech
 development - than non-identical siblings.

    Obesity Women who gain weight after their 18th birthday are more likely
 to develop asthma as adults than those who do not, according to a
 study of more than 85,000 registered nurses conducted by
 researchers at the Harvard School of Public Health. The finding,
 published in the Archives of Internal Medicine, suggests that the
 twin epidemics of adult asthma and obesity may be related. The
 prevalence of asthma, which affects about 7 per cent of the
 population, has risen steadily in the past 20 years in developed
 countries for unexplained reasons. Rates of obesity also have
 skyrocketed during the same period.


    Heart disease Gene therapy may be able to reverse heart failure, a chronic
 condition that kills half its victims after 5 years, researchers
 say. Experiments in test tubes show that a gene known as SERCA2
 may be used to bolster failing heart muscles, a team at
 Massachusetts General Hospital found. They said their experiment
 must be shown to work in living animals and then in human beings,
 but offers hope to treat a condition whose only real cure is a
 heart transplant.

    Lung cancer White women with a common genetic deficiency are at much-greater

 risk from second-hand smoke than women without it, a research
 team at the U.S. National Cancer Institute has found. In a study
 of 106 white female non-smokers with lung cancer from Missouri
 who had been exposed to substantial amounts of second-hand smoke,
 the researchers found that a significantly higher than expected
 number of the women did not have a functioning GSTM-1 gene. This
 led the researchers to conclude that people with this deficiency
 were at a higher risk of developing lung cancer than others. The
 results ''indicate that (second-hand smoke) exposure may more
 than double the risk of lung cancer for nearly half of the white
 women in Western nations,'' the study says.

    Transplants Preliminary research indicates that infusions of liver cells can

 keep patients alive while they are waiting for hard-to-find liver
 transplants, according to two studies released this week.
 ''Although it's early and still experimental, this technique is
 very promising. We can keep these liver cells frozen in a bank,
 just as blood is stored,'' said Jaime Tisnado of the Medical
 College of Virginia in Richmond, author of one of the studies.

    Weight Over-

    weight women who lost as little as five pounds handled everyday activities
more easily and had fewer aches and pains, a study has found. Gaining as little
as five pounds had the reverse effect in normal-weight and overweight women, the
researchers report in the Journal Of The American Medical Association. The
four-year study of more than 40,000 nurses, ages 46 to 71, is one of the few to
show that small changes in weight can have a big effect on quality of life.

    Romance

    BOYS HAVE FEELINGS, TOO: Although it's widely believed that girls'
self-esteem suffers the
 most in early boy-girl romances, a new Pennsylvania State
 University-Dickinson College study shows it's actually the boys
 who are most vulnerable - especially if they feel pressured into
 dating. ''Girls have intimacy skills,'' says Nancy Darling, a
 Penn State human development and family studies expert. ''The
 boys are more vulnerable because they fall in love faster. They
 also take breaking up harder than girls do throughout their
 lives.''

    FROM THE STAR'S NEWS SERVICES


LOAD-DATE: December 10, 1999


                               3 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1999 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                      December 10, 1999, Friday, Edition 1

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 573 words

HEADLINE: U.S. GENE THERAPY PROBE REVEALS HOST OF PROBLEMS

BYLINE: Rick Weiss and Deborah Nelson

BODY:



    WASHINGTON - During yet another day of new revelations of
 problems in a fatal University of Pennsylvania gene therapy
 experiment, researchers apologized for their lapses while parents
 of sick children pleaded with federal regulators not to slow the
 pace of inherited disease research.

    In an unusually emotional meeting of regulators and scientists in a crowded
auditorium at the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, federal
investigators revealed additional evidence that Jesse Gelsinger, the Arizona
teen who died from the treatment, should not have undergone the experimental
treatment in September.

    They also made public for the first time that the Penn researchers changed
the rules for inclusion in the study without the required approval of the Food
and Drug Administration.

    And they provided details of deaths of monkeys getting a treatment similar
to the one Gelsinger got - deaths that according to FDA regulations should have
been reported within 15 days, but which did not get reported until after
Gelsinger died, more than a year later. Those problems stand in addition to
previous findings of improprieties, including that Gelsinger was too sick to
meet the criteria for participating in the study and that scientists failed to
halt the experiment and notify federal officials as required in two instances
when volunteers suffered serious toxic reactions before Gelsinger was enrolled.

    All three of the principal investigators apologized for the growing list of
deficiencies cited by the FDA this week as part of its ongoing investigation
into Gelsinger's death.

    Investigators apologize for growing list of deficiencies ''We could have
done better . . . and we apologize,'' said Mark
 Batshaw of the Children's National Medical Centre in Washington.

    ''I really regret'' the oversights, said Penn gene researcher James Wilson.

    ''We now recognize we should have contacted FDA,'' said Penn surgeon Steven
Raper.

    Their conciliatory comments marked a rhetorical shift from the single brief
statement that Wilson had made Wednesday, in which the scientist indicated that
the team had been in compliance with federal regulations.

    The Penn researchers also said for the first time that none of the
volunteers definitively improved from the treatment.

    The new information came out at a public, three-day meeting of an NIH gene
therapy oversight committee, which ends today.

    The experiment, which has now been halted, called for the infusion of
trillions of gene-altered viruses known to be capable of triggering liver
failure and death.

    The treatment was designed to treat a rare liver disorder that Gelsinger
inherited.

    Gelsinger died Sept. 17, four days after getting his infusion, from multiple
organ failure that the researchers acknowledge was caused by the treatment.

    His death is the first to be blamed directly on gene therapy.

    In the midst of a mostly scientific and regulatory discussion about
Gelsinger's death, parents of children who have the liver disorder, or whose
children have already died, delivered passionate pleas for the research to go
forward.

    ''There are children alive today who might possibly become adults if this
treatment works,'' said Tish Simon of Union, N.J., her voice quivering with
emotion.

    Simon lost her 14-year-old son in 1996 to the liver disease - ornithine
transcarbamylase deficiency.

    WASHINGTON POST


LOAD-DATE: December 10, 1999


                               4 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1999 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                     December 8, 1999, Wednesday, Edition 1

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 591 words

HEADLINE: CHEMICAL MAKES 40% BIGGER PIGS ON 25% LESS FEED

BYLINE: Philip Brasher

BODY:



    WASHINGTON - Medical researchers using gene therapy have figured
 out a way to make young hogs grow faster and 40 per cent larger.

    Scientists say the technique, which stimulates production of pigs' growth
hormones, would be a boon for livestock farmers - and eventually could be used
to treat children with growth problems and to prevent muscle deterioration in
AIDS and cancer patients.

    ''We think that, over the long term, this is going to be a defining
technology that will change the face of how agriculture is done,'' said the lead
scientist Robert J. Schwartz, a professor of molecular and cellular biology at
Baylor College of Medicine in Houston.

    But the prospect of big biotech hogs is likely to raise new questions in the
growing global controversy over genetically engineered food.

    ''I don't think most consumers are very interested in eating hormone-treated
meats,'' Rebecca Goldburg, senior scientist for the Environmental Defence Fund,
said yesterday.

    Livestock and poultry have been getting steadily bigger, leaner and faster-
growing for years because of improvements in genetics, nutrition and housing and
the use of hormones in cattle.

    But the results reported by Schwartz's team, published in the December issue
of Nature Biotechnology, are especially dramatic. All the improvements in hog
production over the past two decades have pigs maturing only 10 per cent faster
than before.

    Using the new technology, a synthetic chemical is inserted in a
biodegradable piece of DNA, then injected in the leg of a 2-week-old pig. The
chemical causes its pituitary gland to secrete higher than normal levels of
growth hormone.

    Two months after injection, treated pigs weighed 92 pounds, compared with 65
pounds for an untreated hog. The treated pigs eat 25 per cent less feed, which
would amount to huge savings for the farmer, plus they are ready for slaughter
two weeks earlier, Schwartz said in an interview yesterday.

    Feed alone accounts for half the cost of raising a hog and the pigs are
expected to produce less manure, he added. Hog waste is a growing environmental
concern in many states.

    More research is needed to show the meat is safe for human consumption and
the treatment has no negative long-term impact on the pigs. It would need U.S.
Food and Drug Administration approval to be used commercially.

    Schwartz believes the technology could be used in humans as a
less-expensive, more natural alternative to injecting AIDS patients with growth
hormones, a treatment that costs as much as $20,000 a year. A drug could be
administered to switch patients' hormone secretion off and on.

    ''This is extremely interesting work but it has some problems with how the
consumer will receive it,'' said Max Rothschild of Iowa State University, a
leading authority on pig genetics. ''Will consumers eat animals that are treated
in such a fashion? The jury is still out . . . In Europe, the answer is
absolutely not.''

    It would be far less controversial to continue improving pigs by identifying
genes that control growth and other traits, he said.

    ''I'm not confident that these pigs will be as healthy as pigs without the
hormone,'' Goldburg said.

    ''Animals as a whole are less plastic than plants. When their systems are
disturbed by genetic engineering, their whole system can go out of whack.''

    Baylor College, the Agriculture Department children's nutrition research
centre, the National Space Biomedical Research Institute and private sources
financed the study.


LOAD-DATE: December 8, 1999


                               5 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1999 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                      November 28, 1999, Sunday, Edition 1

SECTION: CONTEXT

LENGTH: 3229 words

HEADLINE: WHEN RESEARCH KILLS

BYLINE: Deborah Nelson and Rick Weiss

BODY:

    controversial gene-therapy experiment: Did corporate profit come
 before patient safety?
 'He wanted to help the babies. My son had the purest intent. Kids
 are dying all the time from these orphan diseases. How long do
 you wait to do something?'

    Paul Gelsinger, PHILADELPHIA

    F

    OUR DAYS after scientists infused trillions of genetically engineered
viruses into Jesse Gelsinger's liver as part of a novel gene-therapy experiment,
the 18-year-old lay dying in a hospital bed at the University of Pennsylvania.

    His liver had failed, and the teenager's blood was thickening like jelly and
clogging key vessels while his kidneys, brain and other organs shut down.

    It was a rare and irreversible blood reaction, but it wasn't the first time
the researchers had seen it. Unbeknown to Gelsinger, who had signed up for the
experimental treatment for a rare and often-fatal liver disorder, monkeys that
the Penn team had similarly treated had succumbed in very much the same way.

    The team had moved forward with the human experiment despite the monkey
deaths, and despite criticism from other researchers who thought it was too
dangerous, because they believed that a new version of genetically altered virus
they had developed was safer than the one that had killed the monkeys.

    ''Now I have to think, 'Was I blind?' '' says James Wilson, head of Penn's
Institute for Human Gene Therapy and a lead scientist in the trial. ''I'm asking
myself that question a lot these days.''

    So far, the Penn team's investigation into Gelsinger's death in September -
thought to be the first fatality from gene therapy - has yielded no clear
indication of what triggered the fatal reaction, so it's too soon to say whether
it should have been predicted and prevented. Besides, experimental therapies by
definition often are dangerous, and the distinction between laudable
perseverance and unjustifiable risk-taking can be blurry.

    Gelsinger's father remains highly supportive of the Penn team. And Gelsinger
himself was eager to participate, despite the risks.

    But many experts wonder whether an impatient Penn team overlooked the
study's pitfalls out of eagerness to win a race to produce the world's first
gene- based cure. As scientists work to cure diseases by giving people new,
healthy genes, some are asking whether U.S. government regulators' enthusiasm
for the hot new field - and their enchantment with Wilson's stellar reputation -
may have led them to give Wilson the benefit of the doubt at too many points
along the way.

    Also anxious for success were the corporate investors who have funneled tens
of millions of dollars into a gene-therapy company Wilson founded and into his
lab at Penn on the bet that he'd push the field forward.

    Wilson adamantly denies that he was influenced by financial concerns. But
such tight ties between university researchers and private industry are
worrisome to ethicists.

    A detailed examination of research records, along with interviews with
scientists and government officials, has revealed:

    The Penn experiment was the first to shoot such a heavy dose of gene-altered
viruses directly into the bloodstream of patients with a genetic disease, even
as researchers acknowledged that it had no chance of curing that disease and
despite widespread uncertainty in the field about toxic side effects.

    Contrary to most high-risk research, the Penn study experimented with the
healthiest rather than sickest segment of the patient population - people such
as Gelsinger, who had his disease under control with conventional drugs and
diet, or people who had no symptoms at all.

    Volunteers were recruited in ways that federal officials had explicitly
precluded as being too potentially coercive, with direct appeals on a patient
advocacy Web site that heralded ''promising'' early results from the clinical
trial and said the experiment used ''very low doses'' when in fact they were
relatively high.

    The original consent form, reviewed publicly by the National Institutes of
Health (NIH), clearly notified prospective participants that monkeys had died
from a related treatment, but the final version given to patients eliminated any
mention of the deaths. (The NIH, an agency connected to the U.S. Department of
Health, makes grants to scientists and evaluates their proposed experiments.)

    Wilson has a financial interest in a private company he founded, Genovo Inc.
of Sharon Hill, Pa., which has rights to discoveries made by him at his lab on
the Penn campus and which has a substantial financial stake in seeing
liver-directed gene therapy succeed.

    Gelsinger's death may never be fully explained. But already it has
revitalized long-standing criticisms that gene-therapy researchers, whose
treatments have disappointed more than 3,000 patients since 1990, are
experimenting on too many people too soon.

    ''People will say they cannot cure patients and now they're killing them,''
says Guenter Cichon of Berlin's Humboldt University, one of several researchers
who have documented the potentially deadly nature of the viruses that were given
to Gelsinger.

    The teenager suffered from a disease called ornithine transcarbamylase (OTC)
deficiency. Victims are born with a genetic mutation that leaves their livers
unable to break down ammonia, a normal by-product of metabolism. High ammonia
levels can quickly become fatal, and the disease affects newborn boys most
seriously, killing about half of them soon after birth.

    An estimated 1 in 40,000 babies is born with a defective OTC gene, a tiny
population of patients for a major scientific effort. But Wilson, one of the
country's leading geneticists, saw an opportunity to tackle a horrific disease
while perfecting his technique for delivering genes to the liver, which he
considered the key to curing many other more common diseases that have their
roots in that organ.

    In discussions with colleague Mark Batshaw, who pioneered a drug-and-diet
regimen for OTC survivors that has saved many lives, Wilson became convinced
that OTC deficiency was the perfect disease to prove the potential of gene
therapy for the liver. Wilson and Batshaw, along with surgeon Steven Raper from
Penn, developed a plan to use gene-altered viruses to deliver healthy copies of
the OTC gene to affected newborns as soon as they were diagnosed - generally
when they were on the brink of death from skyrocketing ammonia levels soon after
birth.

    The scientists knew the therapy was potentially dangerous, because the gene-
altered virus they would use to get the new genes into the newborns' cells can
trigger life-threatening reactions. They also knew the therapy would be
short-lived, because the babies' immune systems would shut down the new genes
within a few days or weeks.

    But in such a desperately ill population, for whom no effective treatment
exists, the risk of the new therapy would be justified, the researchers
reasoned. And once these infants made it through their first crisis, they could
be placed on Batshaw's diet-and-drug regimen and perhaps live fairly normal
lives.

    It seemed like medicine at its best: trying to save babies from an incurable
disease. So the team was shocked when Penn's own ethicists rejected the
proposal. Parents whose children are so close to death cannot be counted on to
make rational decisions about whether to enter those children into a new,
potentially dangerous and unproved experiment, the ethicists said.

    Thus began a change of focus that, in many experts' eyes, triggered an
unconscionable shift in the study's balance of risks and benefits: Rather than
drop their focus on OTC altogether, the researchers decided to experiment on
healthy or stable adult OTC patients such as Gelsinger, who had survived to
adulthood because they had milder forms of the disease.

    If the treatment proved safe, the researchers could bolster their case for
testing its usefulness in newborns. But first they would have to test its safety
in adults for whom safe and conventional treatments already existed, whose
livers were already stressed because of their disease, and who stood no chance
of getting any lasting benefit from the experimental approach.

    That shift in focus stirred intense debate in 1995 when the study was
reviewed by federal officials. But despite some remaining concerns, the plan was
approved by federal regulators amid a wave of optimism that scientists were on
the brink of a medical breakthrough.

    ''We had to select one disease to move forward in for gene therapy to the
liver,'' Wilson recalls. ''I thought the severity of the disease (OTC) would
warrant and justify trying this therapy. It's such a compelling story.''

    Since Wilson founded Genovo in 1992, the company has attracted two major
corporate investors. While neither of those companies is interested in OTC
specifically - it afflicts too few people to be commercially attractive - both
are interested in gene delivery to the liver.

    Biogen Inc. of Cambridge, Mass., has paid Genovo the equivalent of $51
million since 1995 for the right to eventually market various liver- and lung-
related genetic therapies developed by Genovo.

    The deal called for Genovo to make progress in moving gene therapy toward a
marketable product, says Genovo president Eric Aguiar. Under the agreement,
Genovo must share the Biogen money with Wilson's institute at Penn, which today
depends on that arrangement for about 20 per cent of its budget.

    In August, Genovo sealed a second deal with Genzyme Corp., another
biotechnology company in Cambridge, to develop liver-directed gene therapy for
metabolic disorders.

    Genovo has a direct stake in the genetically engineered adenovirus that
Wilson developed for the OTC trial, according to Wilson and Aguiar. If Wilson
and his colleagues can demonstrate that the virus is a good vehicle for ferrying
genes into the body, the company and Wilson could benefit financially.

    Wilson says he went to great pains to ensure that his business interests
would not influence his judgment during the OTC adenovirus trial. Although he
was a senior scientist, for example, he gave Raper control over medical and
patient-care decisions.

    ''To suggest that I acted or was influenced by money is really offensive to
me,'' he says. ''I don't think about how my doing this work is going to make me
rich. It's about leadership and notoriety and accomplishment. Publishing in
first-rate journals. That's what turns us on. You've got to be on the cutting
edge and take risks if you're going to stay on top.''

    Nevertheless, Wilson's own financial-disclosure statement says he and Genovo
''have a financial interest in a successful outcome from the research involved
in this study.'' Wilson acknowledges that the ties with Genovo are tight enough
to require him to include that statement on research papers and the consent
forms that patients sign when entering his clinical trials, including the OTC
experiment.

    Forty per cent of the gene-therapy protocols approved in the past three
years have had corporate sponsors. Wilson and others argue that sponsorship
provides an important source of funding for research and an eventual pipeline to
get cures to the public.

    Yet the business-academia pipeline has been the subject of much criticism in
recent years, because it may sometimes force scientists to choose between good
science and good business.

    Aguiar said Wilson is too much a scientist to compromise. But Wilson is also
very plugged in to the company, Aguiar says, and calls him on the telephone
frequently during the week.

    In their worst-case scenarios, Wilson, Batshaw and Raper thought they might
see an inflamed liver in their patients. But the researchers thought they had
licked earlier problems with a new, safer brew of genetically engineered
adenovirus.

    Adenoviruses, a class of viruses that cause the common cold and
conjunctivitis, or pink eye, are extraordinarily efficient at infecting many
kinds of human cells. Because of that, they have become popular with gene
therapists as a way of delivering helpful genes to sick people. But there are
downsides: Adenoviruses trigger intense immune-system reactions and can prompt a
life-threatening inflammatory response.

    Because of those possible problems, many scientists have stopped using
adenoviruses to treat genetic diseases and are looking for other, more-
promising gene-delivery systems.

    But Wilson's team had worked feverishly during the early 1990s to develop a
less-inflammatory adenovirus.

    The team also spliced copies of the OTC gene into the virus - the payload to
be delivered to OTC-deficient patients.

    While all four rhesus monkeys that had been given high doses of the first-
generation virus had died in previous experiments, subsequent tests of the later
viruses on monkeys and mice seemed to confirm that it was less toxic, although
it still triggered liver inflammation. By cutting back the dose two hundredfold,
the scientists and the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) concluded that
they could deliver it safely to humans, especially because humans are so much
bigger than monkeys. That is a presumption that federal regulators now question.

    But at the time, the Penn researchers were confident in their plan, which
included monitoring for early signs of trouble as they gradually increased doses
and treating unexpected crises with a proven backup treatment. They commenced
treatments in 1997.

    Between the start of the clinical trial and Gelsinger's death, however, new
research elsewhere provided further evidence of toxicity and the need for
caution in using adenoviruses in the liver.

    The NIH tested a closely related adenovirus on the livers of three macaque
monkeys, which fell seriously ill with symptoms similar to those that killed
Gelsinger. They recovered, but one suffered permanent liver damage.

    A German study involving similar adenoviruses caused acute, toxic responses
in rabbits that also resembled those that killed Gelsinger. Cichon, the Berlin
researcher who led that study, concluded that adenoviruses should be used only
in dire circumstances, such as when the only other alternative is a liver
transplant. It is a standard that other scientists say they have adopted.

    To give adenoviruses to patients like Gelsinger ''would never be
justified,'' Cichon says. ''And I am not the only one who thinks this way. We do
not understand why (researchers) are taking these risks.''

    Meanwhile, Schering-Plough Corp. of Madison, N.J., and the University of
California at San Francisco had begun a clinical trial that infused high doses
of adenovirus into the livers of dying cancer patients, a situation in which
greater risks are allowed because patients have little other hope. The company
lowered the dose when two early participants experienced serious drops in blood
pressure. But even at that lower dose - which was lower than the total dose
eventually given to Gelsinger - two patients suffered serious stroke-like
attacks.

    Wilson said he was only vaguely aware of those studies, none of which had
been published in peer-reviewed journals until after Gelsinger's death. However,
the information was widely disseminated in other, less-formal ways, such as
postings on Web sites and presentations at scientific meetings.

    Ultimately, the Penn team tested its virus on another monkey. ''We did it
and the animal got hepatitis but it lived,'' Wilson says. ''That was
reassuring.''

    The FDA was aware of all the data, Wilson says. If the study was too risky,
he asked, why didn't federal regulators stop it?

    In fact, it hadn't been easy for Wilson and his team to convince federal
regulators that they should be allowed to try their approach in people. In 1995,
when the researchers first pitched their plan to the NIH committee of scientists
and ethicists that then reviewed all gene-therapy proposals, several committee
members expressed strong reservations. The approach looked too dangerous, they
said. And because the immune system would quickly destroy the genetically
repaired cells, the treatment would not have any lasting benefit.

    But according to several scientists and some NIH committee members, Wilson's
charismatic style and his good reputation as a scientist won the day.

    ''Wilson said that you should let people be heroes if they want to be,''
says Robert Erickson, a committee member at the time and a University of Arizona
scientist. ''In retrospect, I wish I hadn't been convinced.''

    The NIH committee approved the protocol but insisted on two changes. The
viruses should be infused into a distant blood vessel, not directly into the
liver, hopefully reducing the trauma to that already diseased organ. And the
researchers should recruit their subjects only through physicians, not by making
direct appeals to patients, who might be swayed too easily into participating in
the potentially dangerous study.

    The researchers agreed, but that's not what happened. First, the FDA became
convinced that direct infusion to the liver was preferable and made the team
switch back. Penn is now investigating whether that direct infusion contributed
to Gelsinger's reaction.

    The Penn team also broke its assurance to the NIH committee that it would
recruit participants only through physicians.

    In the summer and fall of 1997, Batshaw wrote pieces that appeared in the
National Urea Cycle Disorders Foundation newsletter and on its Web site, seeking
volunteers.

    When asked about his call for volunteers, Batshaw says: ''We did recruit
through the foundation newsletter. It was passive recruitment in that it just
appeared there. I wouldn't want to say it was advertised.''

    The possibility of volunteering was merely ''posed,'' he says.

    There's little question that Gelsinger was a willing and eager participant
in the Penn experiment.

    He had a mild form of the disease that could be controlled through diet and
drugs. He didn't always follow the grueling regimen, and a year ago nearly died
from an ammonia attack. But since then, he'd felt better than ever, thanks to a
new regimen developed by Batshaw.

    After hearing about the experiment from his doctor, he tried to volunteer at
age 17 - too young for the protocol - then returned as soon as he turned 18. The
research team made it clear that the experiment wouldn't cure him, and the
teenager also knew there was a small chance it could hurt him. But he was swayed
by the scientists' dream that the treatment might someday help severely stricken
newborns.

    ''He wanted to help the babies,'' says his father, Paul Gelsinger. ''My son
had the purest intent.''

    Paul Gelsinger also remains an outspoken fan of the researchers, whom he
considers ''very ethical men.''

    ''Kids are dying all the time from these orphan diseases,'' he says. ''How
long do you wait to do something?''

    Raper, Batshaw and Wilson are deep into their investigation of Gelsinger's
death and will present their results to the NIH next month.

    ''As a scientist it's very difficult to do the tests, because of what they
might show,'' Wilson says. However, he adds: ''If a mistake was made, we've got
to own up to it and learn from it. Ultimately, the tragedy of Jesse's death
would be if we don't learn anything.''

    THE WASHINGTON POST


GRAPHIC: RISKY BUSINESS:
 Jesse Gelsinger, 19, shown in his high school graduation photo, suffered from a
rare liver disease, and willingly enlisted in a gene-therapy experiment at the
University of Pennslyvania run by James Wilson, above right, being interviewed
by members of the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Gelsinger, from Tucson,
Ariz., died in September, just days after Wilson's team injected genetically
engineered viruses into his liver.

LOAD-DATE: November 28, 1999


                               6 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1999 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                      November 28, 1999, Sunday, Edition 1

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 378 words

HEADLINE: MCGUINTY TALKS TOUGH TO STAMP OUT DISSENT

BODY:



    Ontario Liberal Leader Dalton McGuinty put his political life on the line
yesterday in a tough speech aimed at quelling dissent in his party once and for
all. A3

    New laws on child abuse


    Ontario could be compelled to protect children up to the age of 18 - in line
with many other provinces - because of new legislation being considered by the
federal government, a child abuse expert says. A2

    Showdown in Seattle


    Dairy farmer David Krug fears competition from heavily-subsidized Europeans
will drive him off the farm his family has run for more than 100 years, and he's
going to the World Trade Organization summit in Seattle this week to protect his
livelihood. A12

    Running on empty

    Historic Gastown, Vancouver's birthplace and one of its best known tourist
destinations, suffers from a split personality. On summer days, its cobblestone
and brick streets teem with visitors darting in and out of souvenir shops and
restaurants. By night, Gastown is dominated by panhandlers, drug dealers and
prostitutes. How to clean it up? A10

    In other sections:


    AT HOME: Feeling overwhelmed this holiday time of year? Too many of us think
we can do it all - and Janice Turner offers tips to handle the stress. B1


    SPORTS: CFL commissioner John Tory is the voice of logic for a league that
often doesn't make sense and a public face that gave it credibility when it had
none. C1

    HOCKEY: Mats Sundin scores twice to lead the Leafs over the Oilers 5-2. C1

    FOOTBALL: Laval beats Saint Mary's 14-10 to win its first Vanier Cup. C8



    THE TICKET: Season's readings! Our 20-page holiday book guide offers the
best picks in hockey lit., gift books, kids' reads, science, history, travel and
more. D1


    BODY & SOUL: For vast populations of the earth - among them 1.2 billion
Chinese and many millions of Muslims, Hindus, Orthodox Jews, Buddhists and Sikhs
- the arrival of the year 2000 will be a non-event. Faith and ethics reporter
Leslie Scrivener checks out what the rest of the world will be doing when the
millennial ball falls. E1


    CONTEXT: U.S. medical circles are debating the death of a teenager in a
controversial gene-therapy experiment: Did corporate profit come before patient
safety? F1




LOAD-DATE: November 28, 1999


                               7 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1999 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                      November 12, 1999, Friday, Edition 1

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 168 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY OFFERS HOPE

BODY:



    of lowering blood pressure


    WASHINGTON (Reuters) - For the first time, researchers say they have used
gene therapy to permanently change a rat's genes - so permanently that the
changes were passed on to the animals' pups and even to a third generation.

    Writing in the American Heart Association journal Circulation, the team from
the University of Florida said they used gene therapy to correct a defect that
causes the laboratory rats to have high blood pressure. The eventual goal would
be to use gene therapy to treat people with high blood pressure.

    This was the first time anyone had managed to alter so-called germ cells -
which are passed on from generation to generation - with useful genes, they
said.

    ''Our observations are very exciting in the sense that, for the first time,
there is a possibility of permanent control of high blood pressure,'' molecular
physiologist Mohan Raizada said.

    ''Where that leads to as far as human therapy is concerned is far away.''


LOAD-DATE: November 12, 1999


                               8 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1999 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                     October 21, 1999, Thursday, Edition 1

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 391 words

HEADLINE: VACCINE RINGS PROSTATE ALARMS

BODY:



    to fight tumour

    WASHINGTON (Reuters) - Researchers working on a gene vaccine against cancer
said yesterday they had provoked a surprisingly strong immune response against
prostate cancer.

    They said their ''personalized'' vaccine, made using cancer cells from each
individual patient, activated the entire immune system to fight prostate cancer
in eight of 11 patients.

    ''We were astounded to find that every part of the immune system was alerted
and turned on,'' Dr. Jonathan Simons, an oncologist and urologist at Johns
Hopkins University in Baltimore who led the study, said in a statement.

    ''Using gene therapy, we re-educated the immune system to recognize prostate
cancer cells as a potential infection and attack.''

    Writing in the journal Cancer Research, the Johns Hopkins scientists said
they took cancer cells from each patient's prostate tumours and grew them in a
laboratory dish. They inserted the gene for GM-CSF, a protein that activates the
immune system to recognize tumours, into the cancer cells.

    They used a retrovirus to carry the gene into the cells but said their
technique was safe because the virus does not normally infect people and the
work was done outside each patient's body.

    Then they zapped the cells with X-rays to make sure they did not cause more
cancer and injected them in the patients' thighs.

    Within four weeks of vaccination, the researchers found immune B-cells
circulating and producing antibodies against prostate cancer cells and immune
T-cells directly attacking the tumour.

    ''The gene we used to turn on the immune system is so good that it activates
everything,'' said Dr. William Nelson, who worked on the study.

    Killing the cells with x-rays made the vaccine safer and work better because
the dying cancer cells attracted dendritic immune cells.

    ''The dendritic cell is the one that eats the dying cancer cells, processing
components so it can instruct T-cells and B-cells how to respond.''

    It's hoped gene therapy can kill cancer cells surgery and radiation don't.

    The National Cancer Institute estimates 179,300 men will be diagnosed with
prostate cancer in the United States this year and 37,000 will die of it.

    In 1998, 16,100 Canadian men were diagnosed with prostate cancer[semi] last
year, more than 4,000 men died of the disease.


LOAD-DATE: October 21, 1999


                               9 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1999 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                     October 21, 1999, Thursday, Edition 1

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 449 words

HEADLINE: MAN-MADE CHROMOSOME CANADIAN COUP

BODY:



    LONDON (Reuters) - A Canadian biotechnology company was reported yesterday
to have inserted an artificial chromosome in mice that was passed to offspring,
which could revolutionize gene therapy.

    New Scientist magazine reported the breakthrough but warned it could raise
new fears about the possibility of genetic engineering producing designer
babies.

    ''This is obviously going to open up the debate again,'' said Norman Nevin,
chairman of Britain's gene therapy advisory committee.

    Eileen Utterson, vice-president of Chromos Molecular Systems of Burnaby, B.
C., announced the achievement at a London bio-tech conference earlier this week,
saying: ''It's the first time an artificial chromosome has ever been shown to be
inherited in any mammal.''

    Utterson said the company planned to use the technology, which does not
interfere with the cell's own genetic machinery, to create genetically modified
animals whose milk contains pharmaceuticals.

    She insisted it will be tightly regulated and will not be used for human
germline gene therapy - the breeding in or out of particular characteristics.

    ''We are in control of the technology, and we don't want to engage in
germline gene therapy,'' she said.

    Scientists routinely create transgenic animals, where genes have been
altered, for research purposes. Gene therapy in humans involves introducing a
specific gene to target cells to fix a defect such as cystic fibrosis.

    Because it is so difficult, gene therapy is usually restricted to the less
risky procedure of adding therapeutic genes to specific tissue so it can be
taken up by enough cells to correct a problem. Any changes are not passed on to
offspring.

    ''However, if genes could be ferried into embryos in an artificial
chromosome that would safely be inherited without interfering with the rest of
the genome, which is the collection of all genes, germline therapy might not be
so risky,'' New Scientist said.

    ''Chromos's experiments with mice suggest that this should be possible,'' it
added.

    Chromos said it was working on human artificial chromosomes. Already
Japanese and American scientists have created synthetic miniature human
chromosomes.

    In an editorial, New Scientist said artificial chromosomes could change
attitudes about gene therapy and genetically engineered embryos.

    ''In polls, a sizable minority consistently says it would accept genetic
engineering for the treatment of serious illnesses. If artificial chromosomes
really can be made safe, their invention could nudge more people this way. It
would be a mistake to expect the taboo on human genetic engineering to last
forever.''


LOAD-DATE: October 21, 1999


                              10 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1999 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                      October 12, 1999, Tuesday, Edition 1

SECTION: BUSINESS

LENGTH: 818 words

BODY:



    to double market share

    Dell Computer Corp. chairman Michael Dell expects market share of the
world's Number 2 personal computer maker to double or quadruple over the coming
years.

    While Dell declined yesterday to set a specific timeframe on his goal, the
company has grown at double or triple the rate of the industry for several years
- allowing it to recently surpass International Business Machines Corp. - and is
now chasing Compaq Computer Corp., the Number 1 PC maker.

    Dell told a technology conference in Orlando, Fla., he expected the company
to add about $8 billion (U.S.) in new revenue, for a total of about $26 billion
for the year.

    Global Crossing buys Racal Fibre-optic cable company Global Crossing Ltd.,
which is seeking
 to build a worldwide telecommunications network, moved closer to
 that goal yesterday by announcing plans to buy the telecom arm of
 Britain's Racal Electronics PLC for $1.65 billion (U.S.).


    The proposed acquisition is the latest in a series of high-profile deals for
Bermuda-based Global Crossing, which is partly owned by the Canadian Imperial
Bank of Commerce.

    The Racal Telecom business will provide Global Crossing with a key position
in the European and British telecommunications markets. The Racal network covers
6,900 kilometres of cable laid alongside railroad lines and reaches more than
2,000 cities and towns.

    Avigen shares leap Shares of Avigen Inc. rose about 13 per cent yesterday
after a
 favourable media report and the company's recent announcement it
 won a U.S. patent on a gene-therapy treatment for rare lysosomal
 storage diseases.

    Shares of the Alameda, Calif., company closed up $2.75 (U.S.) at $18.25 on
the Nasdaq. The stock, which has more than doubled from its end-of-1998 closing
price of $7.81, traded at an all-time high of $19.21 earlier yesterday.

    Avigen has patents on technology to make purified quantities of the
naturally occurring adeno-associated virus (AAV).

    Its scientists ''gut'' the virus, removing its own DNA, then use the shell
of the virus as a vector, or delivery vehicle, to transfer specific human genes
into patients.

    Genes packed into the Avigen vector, in turn, are meant to stimulate
production within the patient of proteins the individual normally lacks - thus
hopefully correcting or moderating a gene-defect illness.

    Knight/Trimark sinks Knight/Trimark Group Inc., the biggest market maker on
Nasdaq,
 said yesterday its third-quarter profits would fall well below
 analysts' estimates due to slacker trading volume, less
 volatility in prices and pricing improvements for customers.

    The warning sent Knight/Trimark's stock, which was among the most active
issues on Nasdaq, down $3.60 (U.S.), or 12 per cent, to close at $26.38. The
stock is down more than two-thirds from its $81.63 high set in May.

    Knight/Trimark, which processes many of the stock trades that individual
investors make on the Internet, said it would report profits of 17 cents to 19
cents a share in the third quarter, well below the analysts' consensus of 30
cents. The company reported earnings of 13 cents a share in the year-ago
quarter.

    Nexfor to acquire CSC Nexfor Inc., Canada's fourth-largest forestry company,
plans to
 buy out the other half of a wood-panel making joint venture from
 Glunz AG for $180 million in cash and debt, trying to boost
 profit by adding to its wood panel businesses.

    Nexfor is scheduled to pay $120 million in cash and assume $60 million in
debt of CSC Forest Products, the Cowie, Scotland-based venture that also makes
particleboard, furniture components and ready-to-assemble furniture.

    Nexfor will own 100 per cent of the venture at closing, which is expected
Nov.  17.

    Gannett profit tops bets

    Gannett Co. Inc., largest newspaper publisher in the United
 States, reported higher third-quarter earnings yesterday, beating
 Wall Street estimates. The stronger third quarter for Gannett -
 publisher of USA Today and 73 other dailies - was driven by
 firmer advertising, gains in results at USA Today and a decline
 in newsprint costs.

    The company reported third-quarter earnings rose to $207.5 million (U.S.),
or 74 cents a diluted share, a 19.4 per cent gain over last year's third-quarter
net of $176.5 million, or 62 cents a share.

    Berkshire to buy retailer Berkshire Hathaway Inc., the holding and
investment company led
 by U.S. billionaire Warren Buffett, has agreed to buy
 Massachusetts retailer Jordan's Furniture Co. the companies said.

    Jordan's, a Boston-area institution known for advertisements that spoof
other popular ads, has annual sales of nearly $250 million (U.S.). Terms were
not disclosed.

    With the sale to Berkshire Hathaway, Jordan's will be able to expand within
New England from its current four stores, a spokesperson said.

    FROM THE STAR'S WIRE SERVICES


GRAPHIC: AP PHOTO
 <HEADLINE> Food tax tough to swallow </HEADLINE> French chefs and restaurant
owners yesterday protest high value added tax of 20.6 per cent on meals when
fast-food operators only pay 5.5 per cent. Sign at right says government kills
restaurants with tax.

LOAD-DATE: October 12, 1999


                              11 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1999 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                    September 15, 1999, Wednesday, Edition 1

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 723 words

HEADLINE: CENTRE AIMS TO DETECT, TREAT PROSTATE CANCER

BYLINE: Tanya Talaga

BODY:

    'maintain their dignity'

    MEDICAL REPORTER Radiologist Dr. Ants Toi picks up his metallic green Magnum
gun
 and points it against the skin of a bright red apple before he
 pulls the trigger.

    A six-centimetre-long silver needle shoots out and takes a clean biopsy of
the apple's white flesh.

    ''You get an excellent sample every time,'' says Toi with a smile.

    Toi's spring-loaded biopsy gun is hooked up to a sophisticated ultrasound
machine, part of the diagnostic equipment used at Canada's largest multi-
disciplinary Prostate Centre, which was officially opened yesterday at Princess
Margaret Hospital.

    If you are a middle-aged Canadian male, statistics say you should start
paying attention to your prostate.

    Almost 100 per cent of Canadian men will be affected by a form of prostate
disease during their lifetime. In 1998, 16,100 men were diagnosed with prostate
cancer.

    Last year, more than 4,000 men died of the disease, making it the second
leading cause of cancer death in men, exceeded only by lung cancer.

    The new centre - opened by Health Minister Elizabeth Witmer, a host of
hospital officials and big-money donors - is virtually a one-stop shopping
centre for prostate patients.

    Located on the hospital's fourth floor, the centre provides a comfortable
and private location for men to receive advanced treatment for the disease -
from surgeons and radiation therapists to medical oncologists and social workers
- all in one place.

    In addition to the medical talent, the state-of-the-art facility boasts
quick test results and new treatments such as radiation seeding, (brachytherapy)
and hormone and gene therapy.

    ''In most (parts of) the country, most of our cancer centres are built
around radiation therapy facilities and medical people come in part-time and the
surgeons are in other places,'' said Dr. Michael Baker, the hospital's vice-
president.

    'Prostate cancer kills as many men as breast cancer does women' The
prostate, a walnut sized gland located at the base of the
 bladder near the rectum, is the most frequently diseased organ in
 the male body.

    The main function of the prostate is to produce a secretion that helps
activate sperm.

    One of the first signs of prostate problems can happen as men get older.

    The gland can become enlarged, causing a blockage of the urethra, which
makes men want to urinate frequently, Toi explained.

    ''Prostate cancer kills as many men as breast cancer does women,'' he said.

    Yet, most prostate cancers in men are often slow growing and
non-threatening, Baker said.

    ''Most (men) will have grown to a ripe old age without being bothered by it.
But some of them will have it spread and be fatal,'' he said.

    The centre will see everyone, from healthy men who are being screened for
prostate cancer to those who need treatment, psycho-social support and
palliative care.

    ''This is segregated. Men can maintain their dignity while they are waiting
to have this, I must say, a little bit anxiety provoking event, done,'' said
centre director Dr. John Trachtenberg.

    The centre will also offer free prostate specific antigen (PSA) blood tests,
with results in less than one hour, said Trachtenberg.

    Men must often wait up to two weeks to get their tests back.

    A combination of the PSA test with a rectal examination is the best way to
detect the cancer, he said.

    While doctors generally agree men over age 50 should have yearly PSA tests,
all are not covered under the province's health care system.

    ''An issue in our province is that PSA is not funded in the community,''
Trachtenberg said, adding that in most labs outside hospitals, patients must pay
for tests.

    ''If your doctor says, 'Okay, let's get your cholesterol (test) done because
you are at risk for having heart disease,' you don't pay for that. It's part of
our health system,'' he said.

    ''But if you want a PSA test because your dad has prostate cancer or your
brother, and you know you are high risk, you have to pay for it at a local
lab.''

    Although prostate cancer cases are high in Canada, little is spent on
research.

    Compared with the $15 million spent on breast cancer research nationally in
1997, less than $1 million was spent on prostate research, Princess Margaret
Hospital said in a news release.


GRAPHIC: RON BULL/TORONTO STAR
 PINPOINT PRECISION:
 Dr. Ants Toi demonstrates a Magnum biopsy gun, which takes a sample to test for
prostate cancer. Almost 100 per cent of Canadian men will be affected by a form
of prostate disease during their lives.

LOAD-DATE: September 15, 1999


                              12 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1999 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                     September 14, 1999, Tuesday, Edition 1

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 351 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY BOOSTS AGING BRAINS

BODY:




    WASHINGTON (AP) - Aged brains have been restored to youthful vigour in a
gene therapy experiment with monkeys that may soon be tested in humans with
Alzheimer's disease, researchers report.

    Scientists hope the treatment will reinvigorate thinking and memory.

    ''To our surprise, this technique nearly completely reversed'' the effects
of aging on a group of key brain cells that had shrunk in elderly Rhesus
monkeys, said Dr. Mark H. Tuszynski of the University of California, San Diego.

    Tuszynski is senior author of a study appearing today in The Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences.

    The studies reinforce a new understanding of how the brain ages and suggest
that neurons in the older brain don't die at first, but go into shrunken
atrophy, he said.

    ''We've all heard the dogma that we lose 10,000 neurons a day after the age
of 20,'' said Tuszynski. ''Well, that is false. That doesn't happen.''

    Study shows few cells lost with age

    An actual count of the cells in the cortex, a key area in the thinking part
of the brain, shows that very few cells are lost with age, he said.

    Instead, he said, his team found that it was control neurons in another part
of the brain, called the basal forebrain, that were most dramatically affected
by aging.

    These cells, Tuszynski said, had shrunk in size and had stopped making some
regulatory chemicals, a change that seriously affects the thinking cortex.

    ''These cells are like the air traffic controllers of the brain,'' said the
researcher.

    The researchers found that about 40 per cent of the basal forebrain cells
could not be detected in old monkeys, and the other 60 per cent had shrunk in
size by 10 per cent.

    But the cells were not dead, Tuszynski said. By inserting genes for nerve
growth factor, or NGF, into the brain, he said, the cells were revived and
restored to nearly full vigour.

    The therapy is so promising that the researchers applied in June to the U.S.
Food and Drug Administration to test the gene therapy technique in humans with
Alzheimer's disease.


LOAD-DATE: September 15, 1999


                              13 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1999 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                     September 10, 1999, Friday, Edition 1

SECTION: LIFE

LENGTH: 347 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY HELPS BRAIN CELLS LIVE AFTER STROKE

BODY:



    WASHINGTON (Reuters) - Blocking the action of certain genes may help a
patient's brain cells survive after a stroke, researchers say.

    A team at the University of Rochester Medical Centre has found two genes are
involved with the mass die-off of cells after a stroke and say understanding
just how the genes work could lead to better drugs for stroke patients.

    ''If we can understand how that precise switch is regulated, it would open
the door to some very interesting neuroprotective compounds to treat stroke, ''
says Dr. Howard Federoff, who led the study.

    Federoff and his team say interfering with the gene HIF1a in mice helped
their brain cells survive better after a stroke.

    In an ischemic stroke, a blood clot blocks the flow of blood into the brain.
Neurons, starved of oxygen, start to die.

    One

    two

    three In a process not yet fully understood, they send out chemical
 signals that are less a cry for help than a kind of molecular
 murder-suicide. Neighbouring nerve cells untouched by the initial
 damage start to die off, as well.

    Usually, HIF1a helps the body cope with low-oxygen conditions, spurring the
bone marrow to produce more oxygen-carrying red blood cells. It can also help
cells survive in the low-oxygen environment inside a tumour.

    But in the brain, Federoff's team found that both HIF1a and p53, a gene
better known for killing cancerous cells, seem to play a role in this cellular
suicide pact.

    They say normal HIF1a was somehow setting off p53 in the oxygen-starved
cells, causing apoptosis or programmed cell death.

    They used a common gene therapy technique to get altered HIF1a into the
brain cells of mice. A herpes virus was used to carry a defective version of the
gene into the cells.

    When those cells were stressed with an artificial stroke, by cutting off
oxygen, fewer of the altered cells died than did those with normal HIF1a.

    A drug that could mimic this effect might help stroke patients avoid the
cascade of damage that can leave them without speech, sight or partially
paralyzed.


LOAD-DATE: September 10, 1999


                              14 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1999 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                      September 5, 1999, Sunday, Edition 1

SECTION: BOD

LENGTH: 515 words

HEADLINE: YEARS OF TESTING AHEAD FOR LUNG CANCER VACCINE

BYLINE: Jonathan Leake

BODY:

    If so, they could be vaccinated'

    David Nance

    of Introgen SCIENTISTS ARE developing a lung cancer vaccine that could
protect
 smokers.

    A device similar to an asthma inhaler used between cigarettes could repair
the destruction wrought by toxic chemicals.

    The vaccine would work by infecting lung cells with a virus modified to
carry a human gene that repairs damaged DNA. Clinical trials suggest the same
method can be used to treat smokers who have developed lung cancer.

    David Nance, chief executive of Introgen, the U.S. firm developing the
treatment, said: It still needs years of testing, but if it works it would be
very interesting medically and commercially because so many people smoke.''

    Lung cancer kills about 17,000 Canadians each year. Smoking is the leading
cause of lung cancer, as cigarette smoke contains a variety of cancer- provoking
agents.

    Introgen's proposed vaccine is based on a therapy being developed to treat
people with cancer. A common virus is made harmless and a human gene, known as
p53, is added.

    The p53 gene maintains the integrity of DNA by detecting and repairing
damaged molecules or, if the damage is too great, killing the cell.

    In many lung cancer victims, however, the p53 gene is made ineffective by
toxic chemicals in the smoke and cannot perform this task, allowing cancerous
cells to multiply.

    Introgen found, however, that this process can be blocked. In clinical
trials, cancer victims were injected with modified viruses containing undamaged
p53 genes. The viruses carried the genes into all the cells of the body, but
they only became active in the cancer cells. Where they remained inert, they
retained the potential to become active.

    It is this last property that Introgen scientists plan to exploit in the
lung cancer vaccine. They reason that giving regular doses of p53 to smokers
would help wipe out mutated cells.

    The company has conducted long-term unpublished trials using animals that
were exposed to cigarette smoke and developed cancer, then breathed sprays
containing the modified viruses. They showed a dramatic reduction in the number
developing the disease. The treatment would probably be used initially to treat
people with early lung cancer.

    Nance, who is planning clinical trials, said: ''Smokers could have regular
tests to show if they were at risk. If so, they could be vaccinated.''

    Professor Nick Lemoine, director of the Imperial Cancer Research Fund's
molecular oncology laboratory in England, has been working on gene therapies.
His approach aims to provoke the body's immune system to attack cancer cells.

    He said: ''Introgen is one of a number of organizations researching gene
therapies for cancer. There have been some spectacular results and they could
soon change clinical practice.''

    But some fear that offering a vaccine could encourage people to smoke even
though smoking kills thousands of people annually through other diseases such as
emphysema. Nance said: ''We accept that this raises huge ethical issues.''

    LONDON SUNDAY TIMES


LOAD-DATE: September 5, 1999


                              15 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1999 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                      July 28, 1999, Wednesday, Edition 1

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 583 words

HEADLINE: CLONED GENE NEW CANCER HOPE

BYLINE: Megan Goldin

BODY:



    could make today's

    treatments archaic

    JERUSALEM - Chemotherapy and radiotherapy may become archaic ways
 to treat cancer if Jerusalem-based scientist Israel Vlodavsky's
 years of hard work in the laboratory come to fruition.

    After almost 20 years of research, Vlodavsky has cloned a gene instrumental
in the spread of cancer. He and his team of Israeli researchers have now begun
to use that advance to seek a method to stop cancerous cells in their tracks.

    ''Chemotherapy and radiotherapy . . . attack every cell that proliferates
and therefore have some side effects. Here we are talking about something a
little more sophisticated, something that is directed against a specific
phenomenon in tumour progression,'' he said.

    Whether from a breast tumour or a skin malignancy, cancer cells invade the
body by infiltrating blood vessels to transport themselves to healthy tissue and
organs. The immune system destroys cancer cells that stay in the blood for too
long. So, to survive and spread, cancer cells need to break through the vessel
walls and escape from the bloodstream if they are to accomplish their deadly
mission.

    Vlodavsky says they do this by drilling through blood vessel walls using an
enzyme called heparanase, which he discovered in 1983.

    He and his partner, Israeli biotechnology firm InSight, have isolated and
cloned the gene responsible for heparanase and are looking for ways to
counteract the enzyme.

    His findings, along with the results of research by a team of Australian
scientists, have been published in the current issue of the journal Nature
Medicine.

    ''The tumour cells have the opportunity to go into the blood and once they
are in the blood they can spread all over and get to the target organ, which we
call metastasis,'' Vlodavsky said.

    ''Actually metastasis is the reason why cancer is so dangerous and why so
many people die from it. Not because of the primary tumour, which can be removed
in surgery, but because of its spread to organs like the brain and kidneys.''

    Vlodavsky thinks if scientists can neutralize the heparanase enzyme, cancer
cells will be trapped in the bloodstream and destroyed before they can cause
damage. While there are other enzymes that help cancer spread, he says his
team's research at Jerusalem's Hadassah hospital shows heparanase is one of the
most crucial.

    Mice injected with cancer cells died in the laboratory within a set period
of time. But when an agent that inhibited heparanase was administered, the life-
span of the mice was prolonged significantly.

    Firm developing diagnostic kit to detect early-stage cancer in patients'
urine The research could result in radical cancer treatments in the
 form of gene therapy or drugs that disarm heparanase and keep
 cancer localized.

    ''This is an important lead,'' cancer expert Lance Liotta said from the
National Cancer Institute in the United States.

    In the meantime, InSight is developing diagnostic kits to detect the
presence of early-stage cancer by looking for traces of heparanase in patients'
urine.

    ''We can look for levels of this protein in the urine of patients, in the
plasma . . . We can already see signs that we can detect higher levels
correlated with the progression of the disease,'' Vlodavsky said.

    Vlodavsky said that if heparanase is suppressed along with other enzymes
involved in the spread of cancer, there is a chance cancer could become ''a
manageable disease'' like diabetes.


LOAD-DATE: July 29, 1999


                              16 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1999 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                       June 12, 1999, Saturday, Edition 1

SECTION: LIFE

LENGTH: 214 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY IS TESTED ON HEMOPHILIAC

BODY:



    WASHINGTON (Reuters) - A 50-year-old man is the first to get an experimental
new gene therapy treatment for hemophilia, researchers say.

    Recently, a virus was used to carry the gene for a blood clotting compound
into the man's body in the hope that it will take up residence in his cells and
start producing it naturally.

    The patient, who was not named, has hemophilia A, an inherited bleeding
disorder. Patients do not produce enough Factor VIII, a substance that helps
blood to clot.

    The disease, which strikes males, used to lead to an early death. Sufferers
died of internal bleeding caused by normal bumps and bruises.

    Nowadays, patients get regular blood transfusions or infusions of the
appropriate blood clotting factors. However, they still suffer spontaneous
bleeding into the joints.

    The gene therapy research team is based at the University of Pittsburgh
Medical Centre.

    Gene therapy has not been shown to work well so far. Either the cells do not
take up the gene or they take it up in the wrong place or its effects wear off
quickly. But doctors think diseases caused by a single faulty gene are good
candidates for gene therapy.

    About one in 10,000 men has hemophilia A, in which the gene for the Factor
VIII protein is defective.


LOAD-DATE: June 13, 1999


                              17 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1999 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                      April 21, 1999, Wednesday, Edition 1

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 462 words

HEADLINE: CHEERING CROWDS GREET CANCER TEEN

BYLINE: Julian Branch

BODY:

    Tyrell Dueck, 13, back home after therapy in Mexico

    CANADIAN PRESS

    SASKATOON - Teen cancer victim Tyrell Dueck returned home yesterday to an
airport festooned with red and white balloons and jammed with cheering friends
and family.

    Tyrell, wearing a jersey and cap from the Detroit Red Wings - his favourite
hockey team - hugged relatives. A nearby banner proclaimed, ''Welcome home
Tyrell and Family!''

    ''He gained a little bit of weight, his hair has come back, he's doing well,
'' Tyrell's father Tim said at the airport.

    Tim Dueck, who asked the media to not interview his 13-year-old son, said
the treatment went well and the bone cancer tumour in his knee is shrinking.

    ''It (the tumour) has changed since we left. It has decreased in size and
continues to.

    ''We saw a dramatic change in the beginning, then it kind of levelled off,
so it's a waiting game. It's taking it one day at a time.''

    Family members were thrilled to see Tyrell.

    ''We're really happy to have him home - all the cousins, everybody,'' said
his aunt, Becky Hildebrandt.

    ''We've got balloons, banners, a whole lot of shouting and screaming,
'Hallelujah!' ''

    Tyrell returned home following three weeks of alternative cancer therapy.

    He had been treated for a month at American Biologics Hospital in Tijuana
after his parents made headlines by refusing conventional chemotherapy for him
in Saskatoon.

    A statement released Monday by the clinic said that Tyrell had undergone two
rounds of experimental gene therapy.

    Purified, sterilized DNA from Tyrell's tumour and a fat molecule were
injected into his body to boost the immune response against the cancer.

    He also received daily doses of vitamins, minerals, enzymes, amino acids,
shark cartilage and laetrile, which is an apricot pit extract discredited as a
cancer treatment by U.S. medical authorities.

    ''Aside from some pain experienced following an outing to San Diego, Tyrell
Dueck was virtually pain-free since his arrival March 23,'' the clinic said in a
statement.

    ''Physicians remain guardedly optimistic over Tyrell's condition.''

    The Saskatchewan government took the Dueck family to court in March to force
him to undergo chemotherapy.

    The issue became moot when Canadian doctors said the cancer had spread to
Tyrell's lungs. He then left for Mexico.

    Tyrell will now undergo a six-month alternative therapy regime at home.

    His parents still may take him to another alternative therapy clinic in
Ottawa.

    In the meantime, the Ottawa Senators have invited him to take in one of
their NHL playoff games. Tim Dueck said they may take them up on that.

    Supporters, meanwhile, have raised $25,000 toward the $65,000 cost of
Tyrell's alternative treatment.


GRAPHIC: GORD WALDNER/CP WARM WELCOME: Tyrell Dueck sits in an airport
restaurant in Saskatoon surrounded by family and well-wishers after his return
to Canada yesterday.

LOAD-DATE: April 21, 1999


                              18 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1999 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                       March 29, 1999, Monday, Edition 1

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 306 words

BYLINE: Mike Funston

BODY:

    STAFF REPORTER

    As Toronto teen Michael Vytlingam continues to fight for his life in
hospital from severe head injuries suffered after a rock was thrown off a North
Carolina overpass, donations for his medical care are increasing.

    Debra Hubbard, a spokesperson for the Cape Fear Valley Medical Foundation in
Fayetteville, N.C., said that as of Friday about $3,000 (U.S.) had been
contributed to a trust fund set up by the foundation to cover the family's
medical expenses.

    Most of the donations have come from Canadians, along with letters offering
prayers and sympathy.

    A trust account has also been set up at the Canadian Imperial Bank of
Commerce in Toronto by Eaton's department store employees at the Eaton Centre.
Michael worked there part-time and his mother is a long-time employee at the
store. The amount raised in that fund was unavailable yesterday.

    Michael, 18, was still listed in critical condition in a coma at Cape Fear
Valley Medical Centre yesterday, a hospital spokesperson said.

    Michael was struck by a 23-kilogram rock tossed off the Fields Rd. overpass
on I-95 outside Fayetteville while returning to Toronto with his father Dennis
Vytlingam from a Florida fishing trip on March 15.

    They had flown to Florida and were driving a Ford Explorer back to Toronto
for a retired Forest Hill couple who had been vacationing there.

    Another rock was tossed off the overpass at the same time and struck a
truck, but the driver wasn't injured. The truck driver reported seeing two
people on the overpass.

    No arrests have been made.

    Donations to cover Vytlingam's medical expenses in the United States can be
sent c/o Debra Hubbard, Cape Fear Valley Medical Foundation, P.O. Box 2000, 1638
Owen Dr., Fayetteville, N.C., 28302-2000. Note on cheques the donation is for
the family.


GRAPHIC: TYRELL DUECK: Says he's feeling better after cancer treatment in
Mexico. <HEADLINE> Thank you Canada, cancer teen says </HEADLINE> TIJUANA,
Mexico (CP) - With the throbbing pain from his tumour subsiding, Tyrell Dueck
sat up in his hospital bed yesterday and sent a message to Canadians who had
helped him go to a Mexican clinic for alternative treatment. ''Thanks for your
support everybody,'' the 13-year-old said with a bashful grin. Hundreds of
people in his home province Saskatchewan and across Canada have raised about
$11,000 that will defray some of the costs of the $6,000-a-week therapy he's
receiving. His parents fought a court battle with provincial officials in
Saskatchewan over his treatment. Ministry of health lawyers had sought a court
order compelling Tyrell to have his right leg amputated and chemotherapy
sessions restarted. That legal battle ended last week when doctors in
Saskatchewan said the bone cancer had spread from his leg to his lungs and there
was nothing they could do for him. He arrived in Tijuana last Tuesday and was
immediately given capsules containing shark cartilage, put on laetrile, which is
made from an extract of apricot pits and given gene therapy over the weekend.
Tyrell, who was well enough yesterday to speak with a few reporters, said he's
feeling better than he has in weeks. He's looking forward to going across the
U.S. border to Sea World and eventually to Ottawa, where the NHL's Ottawa
Senators have invited him and his family to watch one of their upcoming games.
He also briefly compared the unorthodox treatment he's receiving to the
chemotherapy his doctors had recommended. ''I don't get sick with this one,'' he
said. His father Tim Dueck said ''He looks healthy now. ''He's got that real
pink glow. It's nice to see,'' Dueck said, during a conversation outside the
clinic. ''He'd actually like to get out of here for awhile.'' </BODY> </STORY>
<STORY> <HEAD> <ID> 199903291009431 </ID> <MOD> ADD </MOD> <PUB> The Toronto
Star </PUB> <DATE> 19990329 </DATE> <SECTION> NEWS </SECTION> <EDITION> 1
</EDITION> <COPY> Copyright (c) 1999 Toronto Star, All Rights Reserved. </COPY>
</HEAD> <BODY> <HEADLINE> Dalton McGuinty's big night out </HEADLINE> AT THE
TORONTO Convention Centre tonight, Dalton McGuinty will deliver what is arguably
the most important speech of his 28 months as leader of the provincial Liberals.
The occasion is the annual Liberal fundraising dinner. More than 1,200 Liberals
and hangers-on have paid $500 a plate to hear McGuinty speak, and they will
expect value for their money. With an election call expected in just a few
weeks, they will also want to be assured that McGuinty has the right stuff to
take on Premier Mike Harris and the Tories. Last year, at the same dinner,
McGuinty bombed, by his own admission. Overcoached, he dropped his normal,
folksy speaking style, which can be quite effective, in favour of a
roller-coaster approach that alternated between sotto voce and shouting. The
effect was grating. Political speeches are not, of course, all about style.
Content matters, and McGuinty will have to show his audience that he has an
alternative vision for Ontario. So far, McGuinty has been strong on
generalities: The Liberals, unlike the Tories, would govern for all Ontarians,
not just society's ''winners,'' and would seek compromises rather than
confrontation. (Thus the Tories describe McGuinty as ''weak and vacillating.'')
The Liberals would seek to preserve public education and health care by spending
more on both while at the same time they would remain fiscally responsible and
balance the budget without raising taxes. (This has led to the New Democrats'
charge that McGuinty is ''Harris Lite.'') Where McGuinty has fallen short is on
specifics, although, to be fair, the same could be said of the Tories and the
New Democrats. In recent weeks, McGuinty has attempted to address this concern
by doing a sort of platform striptease, unveiling specific planks one by one.
There have been promises to reduce tuition fees, provide incentives to lure
doctors to remote regions, allow foreign-trained doctors to practise, and so on.
More will come tonight. There are three problems inherent in this approach.
First, McGuinty hasn't spelled out where the money will come from, except to
suggest that he is counting on a budgetary surplus. Since that surplus has yet
to emerge - and, indeed, will likely be pushed off into the future by yet
another tax cut in this spring's budget - McGuinty's fiscal probity is being
called into question. Second, the Tories themselves are moving toward the centre
of the political spectrum and have begun stealing bits and pieces of McGuinty's
platform. The Liberals joke that Harris is becoming ''McGuinty Lite.'' But it
will be no joke if the middle-of-the-road voters move over to the Tories as a
result. McGuinty has begun urging voters not to be fooled. ''These guys (the
Tories) are the M&Ms of Ontario politics,'' he says. ''Sure, on the outside
they're sweet, but inside they're still real nuts.'' Third, without the
coherency of an over-arching platform, the separate planks so far unveiled
appear to be little more than a grab bag of goodies for special interests. The
Tories believe that McGuinty is vulnerable on this point and will try to portray
him as the handmaiden of the interest groups - particularly the teachers'
unions. In a recent speech to the public high school teachers' union , McGuinty
addressed this problem head-on. He pleaded with them not to put him on the spot
by trying to extract commitments from him on every one of their positions. If
they do, he said, ''Mike Harris will sail back into office.'' But unfortunately
for McGuinty, he is already on the record siding with teachers' demands for
returning school principals to their unions and for restoring their right to
bargain increases in prep time. Although he won't emphasize these points during
the election campaign, the Tories won't let him run away from them. Footnote:
The main purpose of tonight's dinner is, of course, to raise money for the
Liberal campaign. With more than 1,200 tickets sold at $500 a plate, the party
should net about $500, 000 after expenses. The Liberals, who as recently as a
year ago were $2 million in debt, say that they are now in the black and will
have enough to run a campaign. But they are going to be hard-pressed to match
the Tories dollar-for-dollar. The Tories plan their own fundraising dinner at
the end of April, with tickets priced at up to $1,500 a plate. Last year, 3,000
came out to dinner. Ian Urquhart is The Star's provincial affairs columnist.
</BODY> </STORY> <STORY> <HEAD> <ID> 199903291042083 </ID> <MOD> ADD </MOD>
<PUB> The Toronto Star </PUB> <DATE> 19990329 </DATE> <SECTION> NEWS </SECTION>
<EDITION> 1 </EDITION> <COPY> Copyright (c) 1999 Toronto Star, All Rights
Reserved. </COPY> </HEAD> <BODY> <HEADLINE> It's time for a taxi shake-up
</HEADLINE> Two weeks ago a cab driver asked a tantalizing question: How about
an experiment where cab fares are halved for a month or two to check if more
riders at a lower rate would result in a higher take for a driver? In the past,
it's an idea that crossed my mind as cab fares increased: The link between cost
and demand. We know that transit ridership drops when fares are hiked. Is it the
same for cabs? My answer to the cab driver was that, however worthy the idea,
such an experiment is out of the question the way things are organized. City
council sets the rules for both transit and cabs. Lower cab fares equals
competition for transit and, potentially, fewer transit riders. Council
subsidizes transit. Fewer transit riders means higher subsidies. So, there's no
payoff if cab use increases. That's a conflict of interest. The result is that,
while city council makes cosmetic changes and talks the talk about clean and
comfortable cabs and skilled drivers, there's no incentive to go the full
hundred yards. Proof? Numerous attempts over the years to get tough with the
taxi industry have been sidelined by local politicians. Then, a city hall task
force recommended a new fleet of 300 driver-owned, upscale ''ambassador cabs''
to inject new life and some competition into the taxi industry. After city
council got through with that idea, only 100 new licenses were approved. Last
week, James Ridge was appointed as the new taxi czar at city hall. Ridge is
described as ''a tough, no-nonsense administrator. '' It can only be hoped he
gives some tough, no-nonsense thought to taking the cab licensing function
independent of the city. Or, at least, keeping the operation at a distant arms
length. That way, the cab industry could be given some leeway for
experimentation and innovation - and city planners some incentive to look at cab
use in a different way. Try this from an analysis of the taxi business in
Portland, Oregon: ''Planners frequently overlook the industry as a legitimate
form of transit as taxicabs do not provide many shared rides, utilize vehicles
similar to private automobiles ... and almost never fall into the purview of
planning departments. On the supply side, the low utilization rate of taxicabs
and their relatively low market share of trips in most cities is largely due to
local regulations which effectively prohibit the entry of new firms, prohibit
competition within the industry, give subsidies to public transit competitors
and limit the ability of transit agencies to contract out services to taxicab
companies.'' The analysis finds that in cities where deregulation is in effect
or where unregulated cabs operate, ''Thousands of shared ride taxis and jitneys
provide convenient, low- priced, door-to-door service on a daily basis.'' Lots
of ideas worth exploring. Deregulation, for instance. Cities cutting red tape to
encourage more competition have experienced mixed results. In some cases, fist
fights break out on cab ranks as drivers compete for passengers. But a Texas
study revealed that ''after Indianapolis lifted its cap on the number of taxis,
unfixed cab fares and let the market work, in less than five months there were
29 new cab companies (20 of which were minority owned), 45 more cabs on the
streets, one jitney company that takes inner-city workers to jobs in another
county and 7 per cent lower fares. Nearly all the cabbies wear ties, rather than
the cut-offs and ripped shirts usual prior to deregulation.'' Then, there's
jitneys, described as ''shuttles operating on a semi-fixed route that stop to
pick up riders on demand.'' In Miami, jitneys transport 15, 000 passengers
daily. Here, we could experiment with privately operated, small buses allowed to
transport riders to and from subway stops in low density residential areas. Add
the unregulated, privately owned limos reached by phone and allowed to charge
whatever in some cities plus the chance for passengers to make the call on
shared rides to reduce fares - and we'd have the start of real reform in
Toronto's cab industry. But, not while the transit regulators call the shots.
Now, my conflict of interest. I'm no tree hugger, but years ago I chose not to
drag two tonnes of rusting metal around wherever I go. Now, I live near work and
use transit, cabs, bike and foot to be way ahead of the higher rent and the
$8,000 annual cost of running a private car in Toronto. And, using cabs, I enjoy
door to door service while you drive around in circles looking for a space to
park or for a bank loan to cover the horrendous cost of parking. My advice to
James Ridge: Give up your car, use cabs, experiment, innovate - and ignore the
transitconflicted politicians. They're as much a barrier to better cab service
as the occasional dumb cabby. Colin Vaughan reports on politics and urban
affairs for CITY-TV. TORONTO STAR FILE PHOTO </BODY> </STORY> <STORY> <HEAD>
<ID> 199903291165860 </ID> <MOD> ADD </MOD> <PUB> The Toronto Star </PUB> <DATE>
19990329 </DATE> <SECTION> NEWS </SECTION> <EDITION> 1 </EDITION> <COPY>
Copyright (c) 1999 Toronto Star, All Rights Reserved. </COPY> </HEAD> <BODY>
<HEADLINE> The human face of government cutbacks </HEADLINE> As Premier Mike
Harris and his health minister set about repairing some of the damage inflicted
on the provincial healthcare system, I cannot help thinking of the last time I
saw Noel. His is the face I will always put on the misery and disruption of the
personal lives that went with downsizing and cutbacks, which hurt so many of the
people who provided human touches for one of the finest health care systems in
the world. With newfound money and an election in the offing, the provincial
government is trying to rebuild the system by hiring thousands of nurses. Still,
beyond the smiling faces at the publicity events and in the television
commercials, it is debatable if anything can be done to repay the human costs to
some of the older workers that went with the slashing. Thousands of young
student nurses can look forward to jobs and careers, but looking around it is
hard not to notice many of the people, who would love to be recalled, but for
whom the new rounds of spending and hirings are too late. The initial round of
cuts were career ending and dream sapping. Noel is in the latter group. The
bewildered look on his face was on the very afternoon he was called to his
supervisor's office at the Toronto General Hospital and given his walking
papers, thereby ending his hold on a job that he had thought would have seen him
into retirement. Like so many immigrants from Third World countries, he had
found a niche in the hospitals, just like so many of his friends who worked as
janitors, nurses, nursing assistants, orderlies and administrators. Many in his
immediate peer group had come to Canada directly from the Caribbean or via the
United Kingdom, where they had learned nursing and health care administration.
Many of them had taken low-status jobs that Canadians had frowned on. Several
had reached mid-management level, were expert in their fields, but were suddenly
asked to take early retirement. While many of them were highly skilled, some
like Noel were not, while others found that their skills were so specific that
they had to settle for jobs below the accustomed standard of living. Indeed, for
many of these workers, a healthcare job had been their ticket into the Canadian
nirvana of a middle class life. They had jobs that were so much better than the
lower-paying, socially inferior ones offered to their immigrant friends mainly
in manufacturing and the service industry. This was why the cutbacks in the
hospitals and in the Ontario public service were felt so disproportionately
among this group. When I saw Noel, he had arrived at his travel agent's office
and, from the look on his face and the hollow laughter as he tried to joke with
us, he was obviously in pain and confused. In his mid-50s and with the economy
contracting, Noel realized there was very little chance of his finding a job
that paid him the same and offered the same benefits. More than that, he was
having to come to terms with the shock that the job he thought he had for life
was suddenly yanked away from him. Noel told us he had driven straight from the
hospital and that he wanted to book a flight for his native Barbados, where with
time on his hands and his separation package in his pocket, he would loll around
for at least a year. There was no need for him to stick around Canada, he said,
for the separation package was such that he would have to wait a full year
before he could claim unemployment insurance. Once his severance pay ran out,
what would he do? he asked. He would still have to work until he could claim a
pension. With such time on his hand, he decided that it would be most
productively spent searching for a job on an island he had left several decades
earlier for the simple reasons that he thought better and more secure jobs were
overseas. So, Noel bought a one-way ticket back to the land he once knew,
leaving his working wife and children behind. The national body representing
nurses has received funding in the last federal budget to research how recent
changes in the healthcare industry affected the profession. Here again the older
immigrant nurses might feel squeezed out, for the emphasis will be on the youth.
Several of the old hands feel that the expertise they acquired on the job over
the years is being discounted as the preference now goes to student nurses with
the degrees the old-timers do not have. And then, there is no national or
provincial body, looking after the interests of the unskilled who would still
like to work, but now find that an enforced year-long vacation has turned into
chronic unemployment. Cecil Foster writes on Mondays for The Star. </BODY>
</STORY> <STORY> <HEAD> <ID> 199903291067645 </ID> <MOD> ADD </MOD> <PUB> The
Toronto Star </PUB> <DATE> 19990329 </DATE> <SECTION> NEWS </SECTION> <EDITION>
1 </EDITION> <COPY> Copyright (c) 1999 Toronto Star, All Rights Reserved.
</COPY> </HEAD> <BODY> <HEADLINE> Donations pour in for Toronto teen struck by
rock </HEADLINE> Still in coma in North Carolina <CAPTION> Michael Vytlingam

LOAD-DATE: March 29, 1999


                              19 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1999 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                     February 25, 1999, Thursday, Edition 1

SECTION: SPECIALS

LENGTH: 934 words

HEADLINE: BIOTECH FUND YET TO FULFILL ITS PROMISE

BYLINE: Rudy Luukko

BODY:


 CMD's chairman
   says 1999 could
   see turnaround
   for unitholders





 SPECIAL TO THE STAR

   As Dr. Calvin Stiller tells it, we're on the verge of the biotech
 century. Borrowed from a recent article in Time magazine, it's
 his favourite catch-phrase to tout Canadian Medical Discoveries
 Fund Inc., of which he is chairman, CEO and chief promoter.
    We're still waiting for the 21st century to arrive. Also in the
 waiting room are unitholders in the $245-million fund, one of the
 more exotic of investments to be fully RRSP eligible. The
 labour-sponsored venture-capital fund has plenty of medical and
 investment expertise behind it but, so far, little to show in
 returns.
   Advised by the Medical Research Council of Canada and MDS Capital
 Corp., the London, Ont.-based fund holds an array of 41 emerging
 health care and biotechnology plays. Anti-blood-clotting
 treatments, bone and tissue regeneration, gene therapy and DNA
 products are only a small sampling of the types of ventures
 represented.
   But while Canadian Medical abounds with examples of cutting-edge
 research, its performance to date has been sluggish. With a loss
 of 9.6 per cent in calendar 1998, the fund is coming off its
 worst year since it began investing in emerging biotechnology
 companies in April 1995. The loss follows meagre returns of 1.2
 per cent in 1997 and 3.7 per cent in 1996.
   The only significant money that investors have made so far comes
 from the federal and provincial tax credits available on
 labour-fund investments. This RRSP season the tax credits are set
 at 30 per cent of the amount invested up to $5,000. This works
 out to a potential total of up to $1,500 in tax relief.
    An added perk this season is that holdings in labour funds enable
 you to raise your allowable foreign content to as much as 40 per
 cent, double the normal amount. Assuming you hold a self-directed
 RRSP, easing this restriction gives you a far better opportunity
 to diversify your retirement savings and increase your holdings
 in markets that have performed far better than Canada's.
   As Stiller notes: ''Labour-sponsored funds give you an unusual
 opportunity, both with respect to foreign content and immediately
 realizable tax credits.''
   Remember though that there's no need to buy biotech to earn these
 perks. Most labour funds offer more diversification by industry
 sector than Canadian Medical, and many have had superior
 performance.
   Contributing to the medical fund's bleeding has been its heavy
 billings for management fees and expenses. Currently the
 management-expense ratio is 4.71 per cent, which Stiller concedes
 is ''at the high end.''
   He defends the high fees as justifiable because of the intense
 research that goes into making biotech investments and the amount
 of time the fund's managers spend meeting regularly with each
 venture firm. ''I'm not going to apologize for this,'' he says.
   Stiller's prescription for his investors can be summed up in two
 words: Be patient. He says the fund is targeting venture
 situations that have the potential to deliver healthy
 double-digit returns to unitholders.
   The catch is that the fund's investments aren't quick flips, and
 profits aren't reflected in the net asset value of the fund's
 units until after the venture holding goes public or is acquired
 by another company. ''It takes you four to six years to exit from
 an investment,'' says Stiller, noting that it will be four years
 this coming April since the fund bought into its first venture.
   While last year was ''nuclear winter'' for initial public
 offerings in the biotech sector, Stiller says he expects great
 things to unfold for biotech, not unlike the recent buying wave
 in Internet stocks by aggressive growth investors.
 ''Biotechnology is going to be the next interest of these kinds
 of investors,'' says Stiller.
   There are a lot of parallels between the Internet stocks and
 biotechnology stocks, and not all of them are positive. These
 stocks often lack a track record of earnings, and they can trade
 at huge multiples to cash flow and sales.
    Moreover, biotech companies face having to undergo a series of
 clinical trials, with government approvals required at each
 stage. Even if there is a research breakthrough, the discovery
 also has to be approved, patented and marketed.
   Only one of Canadian Medical's ventures has been taken public so
 far, but Stiller says four to six of the fund's holdings are set
 to go this year. Four of them have been ready to hatch for a
 while, but were pulled because the market was so poor for initial
 public offerings.
   While he is a passionate advocate of the need for more homegrown
 medical research in Canada, Stiller stresses the fund's
 investment merits. ''I'm not appealing to the maple leaves on our
 sleeve,'' he says, insisting: ''I'm on track.'' This year,
 Stiller will get a chance to prove it. Early in the new year, the
 fund took on a healthier glow, gaining 3.5 per cent in January.
 To make the case for small investors to be in biotech, a positive
 return for 1999 would be just what the doctor ordered.

 Rudy Luukko is a financial writer and partner in FundMasters, a
 Toronto research firm specializing in investment funds. He can be
 reached at research@fundmasters.com




GRAPHIC: COLIN McCONNELL/TORONTO STAR

 DOCTOR'S ADVICE:
 Dr. Calvin Stiller of the Canadian Medical Discoveries Fund says suffering
unitholders will be rewarded soon if they remain patient.

LOAD-DATE: February 25, 1999


                              20 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1999 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                      February 7, 1999, Sunday, Edition 1

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 296 words

BODY:

    Butt out and
 beat the blues

 It's been six months now since Zyban, the latest stop-smoking
 aid, hit the market. Is it living up to the hype?
 So far, yes. The drug, an antidepressant, is catching on with
 doctors and smokers and studies suggest it is the best aid
 available.
 Story, F2

 An advocate for God takes the podium

 Humanist Terri Hope set off a fierce debate when, writing in the
 My God column recently, she confessed to having a hard time
 believing in a
 deity, given the suffering she
 observes in the world. Today,
 Jim McCrea explains the fallacy
 of this argument.
 Column, F2

 Haven't we met
 somewhere before?

 Adam, meet Alon. Alon, Adam. You may feel as though you know each
 other already. Understandable.
 Other people certainly got the two of you confused. Something
 about you both having the same last name. Caused quite a
 situation that. A comedy of errors, you might say. But it's good
 to see you can be friends.
 How we met, F3

 A high-brow tome
 on mourning

 When Leon Wieseltier, a Jew who had long left his Judaism behind,
 lost his father, his grief somehow compelled him to observe the
 ancient Jewish mourning ritual of Kaddish. His book, by the same
 title, is a somewhat dispassionate, intellectual
 account of the long process.
 Under Review, F7

 Gene therapy fails
 to deliver on promise

 It wasn't long ago that gene therapy - the idea of introducing
 healthy strands of DNA into sick cells - was hailed as a huge
 breakthrough in
 the treatment of serious diseases.
 Today it's clear that the hope was
 exaggerated. The therapy is not working, but scientists are
 working on a variation with potential.
 Story, F8




LOAD-DATE: February 9, 1999


                              21 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1998 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                   December 15, 1998, Tuesday, METRO EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A3

LENGTH: 232 words

HEADLINE: Old mouse muscles get shot of life

BYLINE: Associated Press

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   WASHINGTON (AP - Injecting new genes into aging muscles can restore youthful
vigour and strength, according to a laboratory study of mice.

   Old mice gained 27 per cent of the muscle they had lost to age when they were
injected with a gene that prompts muscle cell growth, researchers at the
University of Pennsylvania Medical Centre said yesterday.

   For younger mice, the gain was about 15 per cent, said H. Lee Sweeney, the
study's senior author.

   Before the technique is ready for humans, however, there are both ethical and
safety questions to be resolved, Sweeney said.

   He cautioned that the same gene that causes muscles to grow can also cause
the overgrowth of unwanted cells.

   "Abnormal growth could be a health risk," Sweeney said. "For instance, you
wouldn't want your heart to grow larger."

   Nonetheless, the experimental gene therapy offers the promise of correcting
one of the major problems of aging - muscle feebleness, he said.

   The experimental therapy will next be tested on rabbits and then on monkeys.
Even if those studies go smoothly, Sweeney said, it will be at least two years
before the gene therapy is ready for human experiments.

   Sweeney presented his study at a San Francisco meeting of the American
Society for Cell Biology. The study is to appear next week in the Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences, a scientific journal.

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 1999


                              22 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1998 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

              November 21, 1998, Saturday, SATURDAY SECOND EDITION

SECTION: INSIGHT; Pg. E1

LENGTH: 6956 words

HEADLINE: Chasing a miracle Science is inching closer to unravelling cancer. But
it's a long way from a cure The fight for life

BYLINE: by Leslie Papp TORONTO STAR

BODY:

   TREVOR MORECROFT spent the last months of his life clutching at a fiction -
that science could already cure the cancer that was killing him.

   "They tell me I'm terminal," said the 51-year-old computer artist and video
producer. "But I know there are drugs available; they just won't release them
without a lot of testing. They're sentencing us to die."

   His belief was fed, almost daily, by exuberant media bulletins breathlessly
describing some newly discovered gene, a novel drug, a "promising" therapy or a
fresh way of erasing tumours from mice.

   So much excitement. So much activity. So many dollars spent. How could there
not be a cure?

   "It's here now," Morecroft declared. He was wrong, of course. But it's a view
that's understandable in our age of breakthroughs without progress.

   Scientists have learned a vast amount about cancer. Genetic mechanisms
powering these rogue cells are now understood in "exquisite detail," says Robert
Phillips, executive director of the National Cancer Institute of Canada. "There
has never been a more exciting time in research."

   But that excitement hasn't yet translated into therapies for people dying of
aggressive tumours today.

   Help is on the way. When cancer fact is winnowed from fiction, three
approaches stand out:

   Starving tumours by blocking their blood supply.

   Priming our immune system to gobble up cancer.

   Engineering "smart" antibodies that zero in on some specific feature of a
hostile cell.

   All three are being tested in humans, not just mice. And early, limited
versions of two smart antibodies and an anti-cancer vaccine are already on the
market.

   Despite holding potential, each of these paths toward a cure remains obscured
by a tangled thicket of unknown dose requirements, hidden side effects and
questions surrounding effectiveness. Scientists are hacking their way forward
but clear answers remain years away.

   That leaves thousands, like Morecroft, experiencing a uniquely modern
torment: They see help coming, it's tantalizingly near, but their limited time
on Earth means tomorrow's cures are forever beyond their reach.

   Morecroft's world came unglued last year, in May, when he noticed a lump
behind his left ear.

   Cancer was diagnosed, four small tumours were quickly removed and the area
blasted with radiation.

   "Things were looking good," said the Georgetown father of two. It appeared
that cancer had been caught early and beaten.

   Tall and brawny, Morecroft had the imposing frame of a police officer - which
he was before turning to the arts. But, in February, the simple act of getting
into bed snapped his left hip.

   Scans revealed cancer spreading in his bones. Before his hip had fully
recovered, Morecroft broke his left shoulder on his way to the bathroom.

   When he wasn't bedridden, he spent his days, at an Oakville cancer hospice,
sitting in a padded wheelchair, his left arm in a sling strapped to his chest.

   "If they can put a man on the moon, the space shuttle in the sky and a new
computer system on the marketplace, surely to God they must have a pill for
someone like me," said Morecroft.

   He wanted access to an experimental drug - any drug - figuring it would give
him better odds than he already had.

   "Just give us a chance," he pleaded, sipping cold milk through a straw,
washing down the green herbal pills he used daily as a last resort.

   "I'm praying there's a way. I'm praying that somehow, somewhere, a researcher
is going to help before it's too late."

   He began weeping, covering his face with his right hand, the one not in a
sling.

   "I have other things to do in life," Morecroft sobbed. A groan broke from
deep within his chest. And he whispered the name of his Creator.

   "Oh God. Oh God. Oh God."

   In Toronto, another man fights to control his tears. It's Tak Mak, a giant of
Canadian science.

   When his name is mentioned in research circles, the words "future Nobel
prize" often follow.

   Mak is famous for showing how cells in our immune system detect their targets
and he spends much of his time seeking new genetic pathways to exploit against
cancer.

   But despite all his insight, all his findings and his access to virtually any
experimental trial anywhere in the world, he was unable to save his wife,
Shirley.

   She died of breast cancer in June at Princess Margaret Hospital, one of
Canada's foremost cancer centres. It's where Mak does his research.

   "I come to work here every day," he says, wiping his eyes as weak sunshine
filters through the hospital atrium's soaring glass ceiling.

   "And here is where I brought my wife for the last time. She was a wonderful
person. But this is where it ended."

   Mak's slender body seems bowed under the burden of that loss. He insists he
doesn't want to talk about it - the tragedy remains too fresh and the public
spotlight too painful. But his words pour forth, nonetheless.

   "My torment was that I knew all about this disease. I knew how it worked. But
I couldn't do anything against it. I was helpless.

   "We have all this knowledge, but our hands are mostly tied," Mak says. "I
couldn't save my wife with, basically, an open offer from every major
institution in the world."

   That's how distant science today remains from the cure so fervently believed
in by Morecroft.

   Shirley Mak's diagnosis drew offers of help from hospitals across North
America - from the legendary Mayo Clinic to the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer
Centre.

   Mak opted for the University of California, Los Angeles, where his wife
received an experimental treatment involving massive doses of chemotherapy - so
much that it destroys a patient's bone marrow as it blasts cancer.

   After that body-ravaging ordeal, a stem cell transplant is done to restore
marrow essential to maintaining a patient's immune system.

   The high-risk therapy is being studied in several countries, including
Canada. It can erase tumours from some women, but has failed others and there is
no solid proof that cancer stays away over the long run.

   It failed Shirley Mak. Her cancer spread to the brain and she slipped into a
coma, leaving behind her husband and two daughters.

   Tak Mak, however, has at least been spared one torment: guilt for not working
hard enough in search of a cure.

   "I don't think, if I had worked faster, there would have been something for
my wife," he says, slowly shaking his head. "We're not anywhere that close. It's
going to be a long haul."

   Dr. Mark Levine, head of the Hamilton Regional Cancer Centre, uses a baseball
analogy to describe efforts to beat cancer:

   "There are no home runs," he says. "Maybe in the test tube there are home
runs, but at the patient's bedside we're hitting singles."

   Most people diagnosed with cancer today confront the same three options
doctors have relied upon for decades: cutting cancer out, poisoning it or
disrupting it with radiation. Some patients get all three.

   Surgery lasts just a few hours and can remove all evidence of a tumour. But
that's of limited help if it has already released microscopic clumps of cancer
to colonize fresh organs.

   And even the finest surgeons are stymied when a tumour worms its way into a
vital part of the body, such as the brain, and can't be removed without killing
the patient.

   Radiation can hit those cancers without splitting the skin. High-intensity
x-ray beams are crisscrossed on a tumour deep within a patient's body. The rays
disrupt a dividing cell's DNA, chopping up its genetic code and rendering it
unable to multiply.

   Some cancers are stubbornly resilient to this damage, but patients aren't
immune. Skin problems can occur and there's soul-numbing fatigue as the body
labours to eliminate cells killed in repeated radiation sessions.

   Even so, most patients would rather be radiated or cut than face
chemotherapy.

   Toxic "chemo" drugs poison fast-dividing cells. Cancer cells are vulnerable
because they have shucked off their genetic controls and are busy building
tumours at a hyperactive rate.

   Chemo shrinks those growths and can hit minuscule cancer clumps adrift
throughout the body. But the destruction wrought by these drugs is akin to a
World War II carpet bombing - they damage the enemy and a lot of innocent cells,
too.

   Many of our normal cells are fast-dividing, including the marrow maintaining
our immune system, the cells of our intestinal lining and cells that grow our
hair. They become chemo's accidental targets, leaving patients vomiting,
balding, suffering ulcers of the gut and with shattered immune systems owing to
bone marrow failure.

   Most tumours shrink under this poisonous barrage, but many don't disappear.
Cancer cells multiply so quickly, and knit new genetic patterns so often, that
chemo-resistant variants quickly evolve.

   As vulnerable cancer cells die, immune ones take their place and the tumour
resumes its growth - sometimes faster than before.

   Radiation, chemo and cutting do stop some cancer. Hodgkin's disease,
childhood leukemia and testicular cancer are highly curable.

   Even deadly cancers can be beaten if a tumour is caught early, if it's small
and well-contained and if it hasn't had a chance to disgorge demon cells
throughout the body.

   That's where an efficient medical system can help. Lives are saved through
early detection and rapid treatment.

   Slow, gradual "base hits" against cancer include new drugs that ease the
vomiting caused by chemo. And there's tamoxifen, a hormonal drug that fights
breast tumours by blocking a cell's ability to absorb growth-enhancing estrogen.

   But for thousands of patients with spreading cancer, existing therapies only
buy a bit of extra time, often at the cost of devastating side effects.

   "To hell with that," said Gerald Walker, 63, taking a long drag on a
cigarette held between two nicotine-stained fingers.

   With cancer infesting both his lungs, Walker was given two months to live.
Chemo and radiation could have extended that time, but Walker figured the side
effects weren't worth it. He died on Oct. 24.

   "Why suffer? They've got no cure. Why go through all this garbage when the
end result is the same?"

   But one extra day on Earth would be worth 10,000 filled with pain for
Patti-Reay Boyle - as long as it would be another day shared with her 4-year-old
son, Cameron.

   "I have an enormous will to live because of him," says Boyle, 41, whose
breast cancer spread to her liver. "This would be a whole lot easier to accept
if I didn't have Cameron."

   She expects to survive for perhaps five years if her tumours can be slowed by
chemotherapy and tamoxifen. Hoping to better her odds, Boyle volunteered for
experimental, high-dose chemotherapy this summer.

   Toxic drugs are injected until a patient's immune system crashes, but doses
are stopped just shy of the point requiring a marrow-restoring stem cell
transplant. People are left vulnerable to a host of infections and need constant
monitoring in a hospital bed.

   "I vomited and vomited and had diarrhea that nothing could control," Boyle
says.

   Even worse, an excruciating herpes infection erupted on her skin. "I was
really drugged up for the last while."

   She endured those agonies for about a month, until tests showed that her
cancer wasn't responding and she was dropped from the high-dose program.

   "Now I've only got hope and a prayer, I guess," Boyle says. "This was our
last, best hope."

   Fuelled by desperation, and media coverage depicting breakthroughs, patients
with advanced disease clamour to be in clinical trials.

   "People are anxious to try anything. We have no shortage of volunteers," says
Dr. Keith Stewart, director of cancer gene therapy at The Toronto Hospital.

   Many share a belief that if they search hard, cruise the Internet, work their
contacts or go to the United States, they just might find The Cure.

   Few understand the long odds stacked against so happy an outcome, even in the
most advanced trial.

   "I've experienced it myself," says Dr. Christopher Paige, vice-president of
research at the combined Princess Margaret and Toronto hospitals. "My sister
died of cancer."

   Jo-Ann Paige, 26, died of lymphoma, a cancer of the blood and lymphatic
system, despite being enrolled in a 1980 trial testing a promising new
chemotherapy combination. It failed.

   "Whenever you go for an experimental treatment, you have no good evidence it
will work," says Paige. "And that's hard for patients and their families to
grasp."

   It's also hard to accept being locked out of a study, but most patients
aren't allowed in. Scientists prefer to experiment on a uniform pool of
subjects, so virtually all clinical trials have narrow criteria restricting who
can join. These vary widely from study to study.

   "Sometimes we get anger when we turn people away," says Dr. Frances Shepherd,
Toronto head of an international clinical trial testing a new lung cancer drug.

   "We have to steel ourselves against that," she says, blinking in discomfort
at the memory of past confrontations.

   "It's hard when I tell them, 'Sorry, you just don't meet the criteria for
this study.' It's difficult for them to face."

   Cancer patients in clinical trials are like destitute people handed a lottery
ticket. Chances of achieving fabulous wealth are slim, but they're warmed by
hope, even if just the faintest glimmer.

   Karen Donovan is sure she's one of the few to hold a winning number.

   She was 37 in 1996, when her family doctor told her to sit down and prepare
for bad news - the lump found on her left breast was cancerous.

   "I just sat there frozen for an hour. I just couldn't believe it," Donovan
says.

   It was advanced cancer, requiring a radical mastectomy.

   And in its aftermath Donovan was given three choices: standard chemo, extreme
chemo followed by a stem cell transplant or chemo plus a drug under clinical
trial.

   "I had no doubt, I immediately chose the study," she says. Two weeks later,
she was accepted into the Herceptin trial headed by Dr. Dennis Slamon, at the
University of California Los Angeles.

   If chemotherapy is a carpet bombing, destroying good cells along with bad,
Herceptin is a cruise missile precisely homing in on its goal.

   It's part of a new wave of "smart" drugs aimed at specific targets on the
surface of a tumour cell. Herceptin is the second of these medications, called
monoclonal antibodies, to reach the U.S. market. The first, Rituxan, was
approved late last year for lymphoma.

   Herceptin hits a protein that works as an antenna for growth signals. These
tell a healthy cell when to multiply.

   Breast cancer happens in some women when a defective gene, called HER2/neu,
clutters the cell surface with too many protein antennae - all relaying orders
to expand.

   Herceptin's molecules glue themselves to these antennae, silencing their
signal.

   To test the drug, more than 100 hospitals around the world supplied about 470
patients to receive Herceptin plus a chemotherapy agent.

   One of those patients was Donovan.

   Results were released this spring. In one of the first in-depth articles on
the findings, New York magazine declared Herceptin a "stunning new drug" and a
"breast cancer breakthrough." Other glowing stories followed.

   Life magazine called it "astounding" and "the most exciting new weapon
against cancer in decades."

   Slamon showed that Herceptin, indeed, works to dampen cancer when combined
with the chemo drug Taxol.

   The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) granted that combination a
fast-track approval in September. Health Canada's health protection branch is
evaluating it, with approval likely next year.

   "Unfortunately, a lot of high expectations have been raised in patients,"
says Dr. Michael Pollak, a cancer specialist at Jewish General Hospital in
Montreal. "The actual efficacy of the drug is a lot less than expected."

   In fact, Herceptin illustrates two phenomena: how scientists are using their
new-found genetic knowledge and how good news can drown out the drawbacks of a
drug.

   Pollak took part in the U.S.-led Herceptin trial and several of his patients
seemed to respond to the antibody. But the benefit lasted only a few months, and
was followed by death.

   "It's a definite, small step forward," Pollak says. "And I'm glad of that,
because we need all the help we can get.

   "But it's been oversold."

   For 70 per cent of women with breast cancer, there's no point in even trying
Herceptin, since they don't have an excess of HER2 antennae on their cells. Even
among women who are HER2-positive, the drug benefits about half. And "benefit"
doesn't mean "cure."

   Slamon's study showed that using Herceptin, plus Taxol, stalled a tumour's
growth for an average of 6.7 months - four months longer than taking Taxol
alone.

   Long-term survival was unchanged.

   "It's certainly not a miracle drug," says Dr. Richard Simon, a U.S. National
Cancer Institute scientist and member of the FDA advisory panel recommending
Herceptin's approval. "It's no breakthrough for women with metastatic (or
aggressively spreading) disease."

   As an added worry, heart problems erupt in about 11 per cent of women on the
Herceptin-Taxol combination, a side effect that baffles researchers, since these
highly targeted new therapies aren't supposed to harm other cells.

   "In fact, Herceptin has very substantial toxicity," says Dr. Richard
Schilsky, director of cancer research at the University of Chicago and another
member of the FDA advisory panel.

   "For anyone who has a heart problem, a doctor would really have to think
twice about using Herceptin due to the risk of severe heart failure."

   Despite its limitations, the drug was able to give many women with advanced
cancer a little more time, Schilsky says. And given the prevalence of this
disease in North America, "You're still talking about tens of thousands of women
who would benefit."

   Lynne Taylor wants to be among them. She travelled to Rochester, N.Y., a few
weeks ago and spent $6,000 for a one-month supply of Herceptin.

   She knows the drug's limitations but is willing to risk "bankrupting
expenses" in a last-ditch effort to stop cancer spreading on her chest wall and
in her lymph nodes.

   "I know it's a long shot," says Taylor, 54, of Oakville. "But when you're in
this position, you look for those."

   Karen Donovan is luckier on several counts.

   She started on Herceptin in September, 1996, travelling from her Brantford
home to the Hamilton Regional Cancer Centre for a weekly intravenous dose.
Because she was part of the U.S.-based trial, she didn't have to pay for the
drug. And she was spared heart problems.

   Donovan did find a new cancerous lump, on her right breast, last November.
That required another round of surgery and chemo. But she doesn't consider this
a failure of Herceptin.

   Such a tumour takes years to grow and it probably formed long before she was
in the study. "I'm still on Herceptin," Donovan says.

   Although Slamon's study wrapped up last year, surviving participants continue
to be issued the drug at no charge by its maker, Genentech, of San Francisco.

   "I'm going to keep on this for the rest of my life," says Donovan. Every
Tuesday morning, she can be found in the Hamilton cancer centre's chemotherapy
lounge, leaning back on the green, artificial leather of a hospital reclining
chair while colourless Herceptin drips into her veins.

   "I'm using this the way diabetics take their insulin," she says. "It's my
safety net."

   Genentech is preparing another study, this time treating patients with
early-stage breast cancer. It's hoped the disease will entirely disappear if
Herceptin is given to women whose tumours are small and more vulnerable to
treatment.

   "In those patients, it might be a cure. I predict it will be, in a certain
percentage," says Dr. Bob Kerbel, one of Canada's foremost cancer researchers.

   "Virtually nothing works in patients with really advanced disease. So for
Herceptin to come along and improve things in them is a significant step
forward."

   Kerbel is famous for another way to fight cancer - starving it.

   Tumours reach a critical mass only by producing certain proteins that tell
blood vessels to grow, creating a rogue circulatory system that supplies cancer
cells with food and oxygen.

   Cancer cells also have a deadly ability to breed mutations that are immune to
the medicines we throw against them.

   "At the end of the day, it all comes down to genetic instability - that's why
our drugs ultimately fail," says Kerbel, of the Sunnybrook and Women's College
Health Sciences Centre.

   He seems genuinely astounded by cancer's power to reinvent itself.

   Leaning far back in his chair, almost to the point of toppling backward, he
throws his arms wide. "Just look at the makeup of these cells, the way their
genes are structured - it's chaos. Some of these changes are absurd. You wonder,
how can they possibly survive?

   "Lots of them don't. But some do, and the process constantly creates
sub-populations of resistant mutants."

   Leaning forward and propping his elbows on his desk, Kerbel confesses that
the problem had him near despair in 1991.

   Then he was struck by a diamond-clear insight: Why not develop drugs that
target the blood vessels feeding a tumour?

   They're normal cells, not cancer, so they have no remarkable power to mutate.

   He published his concept that year in the journal BioEssays. Scientists had
been trying to block tumour supply routes for well over a decade. But Kerbel's
article crystallized opinion about the best way to do it.

   Today, some of the hottest properties in cancer research are drugs aimed at
stunting the growth of endothelial cells, the normal cells lining our blood
vessels.

   "For cancer, this is an Achilles heel of the highest order," says Donald
Coffey, professor of oncology at Johns Hopkins University, in Baltimore.

   Excitement erupted in May with a rumble heard around the world.

   A front-page story in the New York Times suggested that two tumour-starving
drugs - angiostatin and endostatin - could shrink cancers of every type, with no
side effects.

   Nobel laureate James Watson, a founder of modern genetics, was quoted
predicting these drugs would cure cancer in two years.

   Radio talk shows, Internet chat lines, newspaper front pages and late-night
TV hosts all bubbled with the story, amplifying its impact and prompting
euphoria in desperate patients.

   Fortunes were made overnight as shares of EntreMed, the Maryland company
making these drugs, punched through the corporate stratosphere.

   Within days, the terminally ill learned that their so-called reprieve from
death was an illusion.

   Angiostatin and endostatin have only been tested in mice. And many medicines
that cure rodents are of limited help to humans. Nobel-winner Watson said he'd
been misquoted, denying he had predicted a rapid cure.

   The lustre of these drugs was further tarnished last week, when U.S. National
Cancer Institute scientists announced they couldn't duplicate the results of Dr.
Judah Folkman, at Children's Hospital, in Boston.

   His research team discovered angiostatin and endostatin, two complex
molecules signalling capillaries to quit growing. Folkman found that tumours
disappeared in mice given these drugs. Malignant growths returned when doses
were stopped, but cancer stayed away after the treatment was repeated several
times.

   National Cancer Institute experts, working with endostatin, didn't see that
dramatic cancer reduction. And Genentech's scientists have also failed to get
results using both endostatin and angiostatin.

   Folkman's response is that these molecules are exceedingly hard to construct
and require some difficult-to-master laboratory techniques. His team is working
with cancer institute scientists to resolve their differences. But human trials,
which were to start next year, will likely be delayed.

   Other tumour-starving drugs have advanced much further up the development
pipeline.

   "We're already working on people - we're light years ahead," says Shepherd,
the Toronto lung cancer expert forced to turn angry patients away from her
study.

   That project is an international trial of a tumour-starving drug called
marimistat. Almost 360 patients are being given the drug and she's working on
expanding the trial by another 200.

   "The media feeding frenzy in May was about mice. But our trial is open and
gathering patients across the country," Shepherd says.

   Marimistat blocks an enzyme, called metalloproteinase, used by cancers to
punch through a glue-like gel that holds normal cells together.

   The enzyme eats through this gel, clearing a path to a blood vessel cell, so
the cancer can deliver its signal to grow.

   Metalloproteinase is also used by invasive tumours to bore through capillary
walls, allowing cancer to get into blood and float to other parts of the body.

   "If we could inhibit these enzymes, we may be able to inhibit the spread of
tumours," Shepherd says.

   More than 100 other tumour-starving drugs are under development and well over
a dozen are in clinical trials. Shepherd's marimistat study offers valuable
lessons, since it has progressed further than any other human study on these
drugs.

   Tumour-starving medications are supposed to have limited side effects. But
early studies show about a third of marimistat patients are hit by severe
arthritis.

   "It's not clear if marimistat's going to be successful," says Kerbel, wincing
and shaking his head.

   Starving a tumour takes a lot longer than cutting, poisoning or radiating it.
And patients can expect to use drugs like marimistat, angiostatin or endostatin
for years - maybe even for the rest of their lives. Unexpected toxicity can
build up when you're on a drug that long.

   "This is cause for some concern," warns Kerbel, adding these drugs will have
to be tested a lot longer than usual to see if they're toxic and if they work.
"We're dealing with a whole new concept of cancer therapy here."

   Shepherd concedes arthritis is a problem, but adds that it disappears when
patients stop using marimistat.

   It isn't clear how many people in her study have drug-related arthritis,
since half were given marimistat and the rest a placebo, without even the
researchers knowing who's in which group.

   Other problems are emerging for this much-celebrated family of cancer drugs.
Researchers have, so far, assumed that all our blood vessels grow the same way
in response to cancer. So a drug that's blocking nutrients from a lung tumour,
for example, should also work against cells colonizing the liver.

   "That may not be correct," says Kerbel. While the cells forming our blood
vessels have much in common, they also vary from one organ to another. And those
differences could limit the effectiveness of drugs like angiostatin.

   Data hasn't yet been published in scientific journals, but Kerbel says he's
heard "through the grapevine" at scientific meetings that some tumour-starving
drugs don't do well when cancer is in two different locations.

   "That's pretty discouraging," he says. "There probably won't be one master
drug (for starving tumours). It may end up like chemotherapy, where we don't use
just one chemo drug, but dozens."

   Every morning Betty Ann Keleher puts four white lozenges on her tongue and
washes them down with milk. Twelve hours later, she swallows four more.

   She is among the first in a study of a tumour-starving drug so new it hasn't
even got a name. It goes by a number, Bay 12-9566, and is being tested in more
than 700 women recovering from advanced ovarian cancer.

   "There's a 50-50 chance this cancer will return, so you do anything to help
beat the odds," says Keleher, 59, of Guelph.

   She considers herself fortunate on several scores. She sailed through
chemotherapy, met all the study criteria and was one of the first women in
Canada on this potentially life-saving pill. She's been using it since May.

   Keleher feels fine, but she may still be out of luck.

   One gnawing worry is that she might be getting only a placebo, instead of
Bayer's new drug. Her utter lack of side effects may actually be a bad sign.

   "I wish I knew I was on the exact pill," Keleher says. Half of the study's
participants get the new drug and the rest receive an identical tablet but
without an active medical ingredient. "Even the doctors don't know who gets
which."

   Wondering if their medicine is real or a placebo is yet another hurdle in the
obstacle course run by cancer patients seeking help from a clinical trial.
Sometimes, even after they've crossed the finish line, cancer reaches out and
drags them back.

   Floor-to-ceiling shelves packed with science journals line three walls of a
library in the 15th floor office of Dr. Michael Lotze. The remaining wall
consists of windows overlooking wooded ridges and distant smokestacks fringing
the Allegheny River.

   Blankly staring into that view, Lotze reports the unexpected death of a
patient who had been treated in a series of trials, lasting years, at the
University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute.

   "We lost Ken," is all he says.

   The centre's public relations officer, Lauren Ward, mutters: "Oh no," coughs
once and rushes from the library in tears.

   Lotze knits his fingers. Still staring out the window, speaking as if to
himself rather than to the reporter who is present, he admits the death of Ken
Curtis hit him hard.

   "That killed me," he says.

   "He was a simple man. A carpenter, a young guy in his 30s, and when he showed
up at our doorstep he had cancer everywhere - lung, liver, spleen, skin, bowel.
We made it go away. We felt terrific and so did he.

   "But cancer found a place to hide. Although he was tumour-free everywhere
else, it got into his brain. Now he's gone."

   What seemed to work for Curtis, at least temporarily, was a vaccination
against cancer designed to make his immune system attack tumours.

   It's one of the oldest concepts in cancer research, with the first crude
vaccine attempted in 1893 by Dr. William Coley, of New York. In the decades that
followed, the approach has gone in and out of favour.

   Vaccines have failed to help most patients but, every now and then, as if to
tease researchers, one or two people exhibit a remarkable recovery.

   Today, vaccinating against tumours, after they've been diagnosed, is one of
the busiest areas of cancer research.

   Pittsburgh is a major U.S. centre racing for a vaccine. And Canada is among
the world's most aggressive competitors, with several labs working full tilt in
hope of a breakthrough.

   The biggest is Pasteur Merieux Connaught, the world's foremost vaccine maker.
It's on a $350 million, decade-long quest to deliver a vaccine capable of
defeating major cancers.

   The Toronto-based effort's first goal is to show, by 2000, that anti-cancer
vaccines can nudge the immune system into at least recognizing and reacting to
tumours.

   Then the job will be to boost that response until it is powerful enough to
kill cancers.

   "The potential is awesome," says Randal Chase, past-president of Connaught's
Canadian operations, his right hand vigorously karate-chopping his table -
thump, thump thump.

   "It's real. We have the knowledge. We have a good chance, a very good chance,
at victory over cancer."

   Scientists have long been tantalized by clues showing that our immune system
- when activated - can erase tumours.

   A nerve cancer, called neuroblastoma, simply disappears in half the infants
that it strikes.

   There have been rare occasions where a melanoma patient has gone home to die,
made funeral arrangements and then awakened to find this invasive skin cancer
gone, virtually overnight.

   Scientists believe that, in these cases, the immune system has suddenly
recognized cancer as a deadly presence and destroyed the threat.

   There's another bit of evidence: a successful anti-cancer vaccine has been on
the market for years.

   Called ImmuCyst and made by Connaught, it activates the immune system to
fight bladder cancer and has an 80 per cent success rate if the disease is
caught early. Developed as a tuberculosis vaccine, the drug's anti-cancer powers
were an unintended benefit.

   Although powerful when it decides to act, our immune system has an
often-fatal flaw: it tolerates cancer.

   That lethargy is meant to protect us. Severe diseases, like arthritis, lupus
and multiple sclerosis, result when over-active immune cells attack healthy
tissue.

   To avoid that, our immune system has evolved to ignore our body's own cells
while launching vigorous attacks on any cells displaying the alien proteins of a
virus or other intruder.

   Cancer, however, isn't foreign. The cells of a tumour remain our own. So our
immune system tends to do nothing.

   The goal of every scientist seeking an anti-cancer vaccine is to jolt that
system with a chemical alarm bell, making it aware of the stealthy killer that
is cancer.

   One way to picture the immune system is like a police force, trained to
protect the body's 100 trillion cells.

   It employs a wide variety of officers with specialized duties, but the most
powerful are killer T-lymphocytes - the immune system's heavily armed SWAT team.

   Lymphocytes, and certain helpers, circulate through the body checking the
identity of cells by carefully inspecting surface proteins called antigens. If
an antigen is normal, the T-cell moves on.

   But if the inspection reveals alien protein from a virus hiding in the cell,
a chemical alarm is sounded. T-cells rush to the area and blast holes in the
cell until it dies, along with its viral occupant.

   Molecules, called cytokines, are released summoning other officers of the
immune system and stimulating creation of millions of new T-lymphocytes with
special orders to seek out and destroy other examples of the invader.

   Science made its greatest leap toward a vaccine in 1991, when European
researchers discovered a surface marker, or antigen, that occurs when a cell is
cancerous.

   If T-lymphocytes could be spurred into attacking this antigen in the same
violent way they do to a viral signal, the cancer would be demolished.

   "That gives us a target," says Dr. Neil Berinstein, director of the advanced
therapeutics program at the Toronto-Sunnybrook Regional Cancer Centre and
director of Connaught's cancer vaccine drive.

   About 40 tumour-associated antigens have so far been discovered and efforts
are under way worldwide to find more.

   "It's likely that hundreds exist - perhaps thousands," Berinstein says.
"We're starting to appreciate that a huge number of them could be useful."

   Connaught is primarily targeting melanoma and colorectal cancer, since many
of the antigens so far discovered relate to these tumours.

   Its scientists are trying to figure out what mix of antigens would best cover
the most patients. Planned vaccines would also carry genetic instructions
ordering cells to produce cytokines and other molecules that put the immune
system on high alert.

   "These will be very complex products," says Mark Lievonen, president of
Connaught's Canadian operations. "Our challenge is to identify the best antigens
and the right cytokines.

   "We may end up with four or five vaccines, each with a different mix."

   The company intends to deliver its payload into cells using a canary pox
virus that has been genetically altered so it can no longer cause an infection.

   Viruses are primitive life forms that reproduce by slipping within our cells.
They hijack our genetic codes and force our cells to work as tiny factories
spewing out fresh copies of a virus.

   Scientists are capitalizing on this power to penetrate cells. They're
neutralizing viruses and loading them with genetic instructions designed to draw
the attention of T-cells.

   Berinstein is about to use such a viral "vector" on about 20 people stricken
by aggressive lymphoma.

   Batches of cancer cells are to be removed from patients and mixed with skin
cell derivatives, called fibroblasts. These make the cancer multiply and
over-express large amounts of various proteins, including tumour antigens.

   Next, these modified cancer cells will be subjected to an invasion of inert
pox virus, carrying genes that order production of IL-12, a powerful cytokine.

   "It's a real double hit," says Berinstein. "T-cells in the area wake up and
start to proliferate. We believe, from our animal models, that this will be a
very potent vaccine."

   Berinstein has one other trick up his lab coat sleeve.

   Unlike most early-stage vaccine trials, which recruit people dying of
advanced disease, he will be giving this injection to patients who have been
treated until they no longer have any sign of cancer.

   His lymphoma patients will first receive massive doses of chemotherapy,
destroying their bone marrow. Then marrow will be restored with a stem cell
transplant and, three months after that, patients will be injected with the
modified cells.

   "That's the unique part," Berinstein says. "We're going to put patients in a
minimum disease state, since vaccines work best early in the disease process,
when cancer hasn't spread too far."

   His study subjects have a type of lymphoma that comes back after treatment.
It's hoped the vaccine will at least delay that return.

   "We don't believe this is going to cure all cancers," Berinstein says. "We
believe it will be safe, it will activate the immune system and it may have some
clinical effect. We're going to have to fine tune it in subsequent trials."

   When it's launched early next year, Berinstein's study will join more than
150 cancer vaccine trials under way in North America. All face major challenges.
A huge barrier is cancer's ability to mutate and halt production of an antigen
targeted by the immune system.

   "That's a real issue, no doubt about it," says Chase, past-president at
Connaught, no longer thumping the table with karate chops.

   "Our idea of a multi-antigen approach is meant to prevent that. We're trying
to quickly overwhelm the cancer before it has an opportunity to use its defence
mechanisms."

   But, like almost everything to do with cancer, using antigens is a lot more
complicated than initially expected.

   Most tumour-associated antigens are also present in normal tissue, in varying
amounts. So they aren't truly specific to cancer.

   That means some vaccines could have serious side effects as they hit good
cells with the bad. There are also individual differences in the way the immune
system works in humans.

   Depending on your genetic profile, your cells could present antigen for
inspection in a variety of different ways. So even a vaccine targeting exactly
the right cancer antigen may not work in you, since your system doesn't "see" it
quite the same way as does someone else's.

   "We have to be prepared (for that problem) with several vaccines," says
Berinstein. "We are going to be treating major cancers with vaccine, but it's
not going to happen overnight.

   "It may be three years; it may be five years; it may be 10 years. It's just a
matter of time. I'm confident."

   But time is precisely what patients lack if they are diagnosed with advanced
cancer today. And science has nothing on its immediate horizon that is going to
save them.

   Trevor Morecroft died on Sept. 11. To the very end, he never stopped
believing a cure was at hand.

   Realistically, none of the leading approaches being investigated today stands
much chance of being a stand-alone cure for cancer - not vaccines, not
tumour-starving drugs and not smart drugs like Herceptin.

   Researchers are virtually unanimous in describing these as promising
additions to what we already have - surgery, radiation and chemo - but not
replacements for medicine's big three therapies.

   There's too much variety to cancer. It's more than 200 complex diseases.

   All result when genes go bad, but their details are so different that what
works against one doesn't necessarily help against another.

   It's wrong to even speak of a cure for cancer, says Tony Pawson, one of
Canada's most distinguished scientists, famous for deciphering the secret
chemical language of cells.

   "There isn't a single cure."

   It's more realistic to expect a series of smaller gains, each helping a few
more patients live a little longer or cope with their disease a bit better.

   To return to the sports analogy: We'll probably never hit a home run against
cancer. But we can still win the game by amassing a string of singles - more
than we've hit so far - using smart drugs, vaccines, tumour-starving compounds
and our expanding knowledge of genes.

   "We now know the fundamental things that go wrong with cells, things that, if
reversed, would allow us to deal with cancer," says Pawson, at Mount Sinai
Hospital's Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute.

   "We're just at the start of the next phase - using that information to find
better therapies and better drugs."

   That effort is set to flourish once scientists have mapped the genetic
instructions that control the workings of every one of our cells. That mapping -
the Human Genome Project - is expected to finish in 2003, two years ahead of
schedule, and should speed up drug design.

   "There's a wild optimism in biology now," says Pawson. "Cancer is a deep
problem, with many layers. All of us have spent the last 10 years finding genes
and sometimes thinking it would never end. But the genome project says there is
an end.

   "The number of our genes is limited. And the number of cancer-causing
mechanisms is limited. We know a lot of them. Sure there are more, and we'll
find those, too," Pawson says. "We can crack it.

   "But we first have to do a huge amount of science."

   Tomorrow: Cancer care - is B.C. better?

   First of a series See related stories by Papp on pages A1 and A28

GRAPHIC: STAR COLOUR PHOTO (VINCE TALOTTA): Dr Mark Levine; STAR COLOUR PHOTO
(PETER POWER): CRUEL MYTH: A Red Cross worker comforts Trevor Morecroft during
his last days. Morecroft never let go of his belief in a cure. Page E4 - STAR
PHOTO (PETER POWER): Dr. Tak Mak; Page E5 - STAR PHOTO (KEITH BEATY): KNOWS THE
SCORE: Even the most advanced trials offer little hope, says Dr. Christopher
Paige, vice-president of research at the combined Princess Margaret and Toronto
hospitals. "My sister died of cancer." STAR PHOTO (BERNARD WEIL): SHE'S
OPTIMISTIC: Karen Donovan was in a clinical trial of the "smart" drug Herceptin
and continues to get the drug. Page E6 - STAR PHOTO (JOHN MAHLER): PAINFUL
CHOICES: Dr. Frances Shepherd has the difficult task of picking who can - and
who cannot - participate in an international clinical trial testing a new lung
cancer drug. STAR PHOTO (ANDREW STAWICKI): REFINED STRATEGY: Dr. Bob Kerbel
crystallized scientific views on how best to cut off a tumour's blood supply.
Page E7 - STAR PHOTO (ANDREW STAWICKI): DREAM GOAL: Finding a vaccine against
cancer has been the mission of Pasteur Merieux Connaught. Mark Lievonen, right,
has succeeded Randal Chase as president of Canadian operations. PHOTO: (GARY
TRAMONTINA FOR THE STAR): Dr. Michael Lotze. Page E8 - STAR COLOUR PHOTO (KEITH
BEATTY): ZEROING IN: Dr. Neil Berinstein, who directs Connaught's cancer vaccine
drive, wants to capitalize on the presence of tumour-associated antigens on the
surfaces of cancer cells. STAR COLOUR PHOTO (COLIN McCONNELL): Tony Pawson

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 1999


                              23 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1998 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                   November 10, 1998, Tuesday, METRO EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 650 words

HEADLINE: New gene therapy could bypass heart surgery Method grows blood vessels
around blockage

BYLINE: (Reuters)

DATELINE: DALLAS

BODY:

   DALLAS (Reuters) - Gene therapy has been used for the first time to grow new
blood vessels to nourish the hearts of patients with severe blockages, doctors
said yesterday.

   A team at Tufts University in Boston said the 16 men who had undergone the
quick, new treatment had less chest pain afterward and had to take fewer drugs.

   If further experiments work, Dr. Jeffrey Isner, who led the team, thinks gene
therapy could become the first line of treatment for patients with clogged
arteries.

   "We can try it and if the patient responds that's great (and) we've saved him
an operation," Isner told a news conference.

   The treatment involved injecting a gene that controls production of VEGF, or
vascular endothelial growth factor, which instructs the body to grow new blood
vessels. Ordinarily, the gene does its work only during fetal development in the
womb.

   The approach could someday spare patients the need for bypass surgery, in
which a piece of blood vessel is grafted into place to create a detour around a
blockage.

   Experts say this new gene-insertion procedure, tested initially in the legs
and now in the heart, represents the first example of gene therapy actually
correcting a human ill.

   The new blood vessels did grow in the heart, Isner and colleagues told a
meeting here of the American Heart Association.

   The 16 volunteers, aged 53 to 71, all had suffered heart attacks. All had
blocked arteries and all had had either bypass surgery or angioplasty to stretch
open their clogged blood vessels - many of them several times.

   Yet each time the blockages came back. Most of the men had such bad chest
pain they could not live normal lives.

   The VEGF was injected right into the heart through a small incision in the
chest. The operation lasted just an hour, and patients were out of the hospital
in days.

   All but one of the patients reported the reduction in chest pain was
"marked," starting just 10 days after treatment. As they got no other treatment,
the doctors concluded that the VEGF treatment worked.

   Last year doctors used VEGF to grow blood vessels in legs blocked by
atherosclerosis but this is the first time it has been used in vessels feeding
the heart.

   Isner says the capillaries that are grown by the VEGF would be too tiny to
see with conventional imaging techniques, but other tests indicate renewed flow
of blood to the heart.

   He has only followed up his patients for a few months and stresses the
technique will have to be shown to have long-lasting effects in many people
before it can be tried on a large scale.

   The procedure is still highly experimental and is probably several years away
from routine use.

   But the potential is huge. Isner said about 250,000 patients a year have
ischemia, or blocked blood flow, but in whom bypass surgery, angioplasty to
stretch open the vessels and drugs have not worked.

   "For these patients there is currently no other treatment option," he said.

   And as the VEGF seems very safe - no patients have reported serious
side-effects - Isner hopes it may even become a first line of treatment, before
surgery.

   Dr. Ronald Crystal and colleagues at Cornell University in Ithaca, N.Y. did a
similar experiment, using a cold virus to carry the VEGF gene into their 14
patients.

   They have not yet been able to tell if the patients have more blood flow but
they say the treatment so far seems safe.

   Viruses are often used to carry genes into cells, because that is what they
do in nature: They grapple a cell and inject their own genetic material into it,
forcing the cell to pump out more copies of the virus.

   "The adenovirus knows where to go," Crystal told the news conference. So gene
therapists cripple the virus so it cannot cause infection, add the gene they
want to use, and send it in to do its work.

   VEGF is normally used only by the growing embryo to create blood vessels.

GRAPHIC: Star Colour Drawing: Growing your own bypass

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 1999


                              24 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1998 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

              November 7, 1998, Saturday, SATURDAY SECOND EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A2

LENGTH: 643 words

HEADLINE: Cell study offers new hope Discovery opens door to replacing diseased
organs

BYLINE: By Leslie Papp TORONTO STAR

BODY:

   The important discovery of a way to raise cells capable of turning into any
kind of human tissue has scientists around the world rushing for a piece of the
action.

   Count Bob Hawley among them.

   One of Canada's leading researchers in this field spent yesterday drafting a
proposal to work with the U.S. pioneers who succeeded in growing these
all-purpose stem cells.

   "This is fantastic," said Hawley, scientific director of the oncology gene
therapy program at The Toronto Hospital. "I'm just about to courier a package to
James Thomson with all of our research in it. We would love to collaborate with
him, if possible."

   Thomson, a developmental biologist at the University of Wisconsin, managed to
harvest human stem cells just a few days after fertilization. His lab made them
multiply, and then had different batches specialize into muscle cells, nerve
cells, cartilage and bone.

   Growing entire organs using stem cells remains a long way off. But the
discovery does open a path to creating new heart, liver, pancreas, bone marrow
and nerve cells that could be implanted into people with spinal injuries,
damaged hearts, diabetes, bone cancer, Parkinson's or other diseases.

   "It's a breakthrough in cell therapy," said Hawley, who recently published a
study in which he inserted genes into mouse stem cells and made them turn into a
type of blood cell. "This is a powerful approach."

   He is to leave at the end of December to start a new job in Washington, D.C.,
investigating stem cells in the national research laboratories of the American
Red Cross.

   Most of our bodies' cells are highly specialized, working as liver tissue,
heart muscle, brain or bone, for example. But long before we developed these
complex structures, we consisted of microscopic blobs of stem cells, each with
the power to morph into any of the thousands of cell types we'd need in the
future.

   Two teams of U.S. scientists have harnessed these cells and transformed them
into specific types.

   Thomson's lab collected cells from blastocysts, or clumps of cells just a few
days old, that had been grown in fertility clinics to make test-tube babies. He
used leftover blastocysts that had been donated by parents. His findings were
published in the journal Science yesterday.

   A second team of scientists, at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore, grew
cells from the immature egg- and sperm-forming tissue extracted from fetuses
that had been aborted. Their findings are to appear in a future edition of the
journal Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.

   The work of these two teams has jolted researchers like Hawley, but also
right-to-life activists and ethicists concerned about the morality of exploiting
human embryos.

   "When human embryos become a commodity, it's extremely worrying," said
Margaret Somerville, founding director of McGill University's Centre for
Medicine, Ethics and Law.

   "We shouldn't create human life to use strictly as a product. This
(discovery) raises profound ethical and moral issues."

   Suzanne Scorsone, a member of the Royal Commission on New Reproductive
Technology and director of communications for the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of
Toronto, describes the prospect of harvesting stem cells from the unborn as
"chilling."

   "It sounds ghoulish," said Jim Hughes, national president of the Campaign
Life Coalition. "I would fight like heck to see that this sort of thing is
stopped.

   "It dehumanizes the human race."

   He remains unmoved by this technology's vast potential to heal the sick and
injured.

   Mastering the mechanisms used by stem cells could help scientists understand
and prevent birth defects. And these universal cells seem particularly open to
genetic manipulation.

   "It raises ethical issues, but it also opens up all kinds of opportunities,"
said Hawley.

   "It's just amazing."

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 1999


                              25 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1998 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

              November 7, 1998, Saturday, SATURDAY SECOND EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. E6

LENGTH: 284 words

HEADLINE: Dow drives close to 9000 level

BYLINE: (Reuter)

DATELINE: NEW YORK

BODY:

   NEW YORK (Reuter) - U.S. stocks closed higher yesterday, with the Dow Jones
industrial average creeping back toward 9000 and capping a 5 per cent gain for
the week amid easing concern over the global economy.

   "All the uncertainties affecting the market have gone, with the only possible
exception being Russia," said Courtney Smith, chief investment officer at
Orbitex Management.

   "The market has gone too far, too fast, but the bullish case is definitely
here."

   The industrial average gained 59.99 points, or 0.67 per cent, to 8975.46, its
highest close since July 30. The Dow came within 10 points of 9000 before
backing down.

   The Nasdaq composite index posted an even stronger gain, rising 19.46 points,
or 1.1 per cent, to 1856.56

   "The market has gone from complete despair a month ago to absolute exuberance
at this point," said Dick Stein, chief technical analyst at Noble International
Investments.

   Topping the gainers on the New York Stock Exchange was biotechnology company
Geron Corp., which nearly doubled after news that laboratory researchers had
grown human cells that could ultimately lead to advances in transplants, gene
therapy and other fields.

   The breakthrough was based on research funded partly by Geron. Shares in the
company closed at $17.19 (U.S.), up $7.31, and it was the most active stock on
Nasdaq.

   Food and drug retailer Safeway Inc. was up $2.69 at $49.87 on news that it
would replace Chrysler Corp. in the Standard & Poor's index of 500 stocks.

   The Standard & Poor's 500 index was up 7 points at 1141.01. The NYSE
composite index rose 2.92 to 565.10, and the American Stock Exchange composite
index was up 2.78 at 670.80.

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 1999


                              26 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1998 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                     November 7, 1998, Saturday, Edition 1

SECTION: BUSINESS

LENGTH: 294 words

HEADLINE: DOW DRIVES CLOSE TO 9000 LEVEL

BODY:

    NEW YORK (Reuter) - U.S. stocks closed higher yesterday, with the
 Dow Jones industrial average creeping back toward 9000 and
 capping a 5 per cent gain for the week amid easing concern over
 the global economy.
 ''All the uncertainties affecting the market have gone, with the
 only possible exception being Russia,'' said Courtney Smith,
 chief investment officer at Orbitex Management.
 ''The market has gone too far, too fast, but the bullish case is
 definitely here.''
 The industrial average gained 59.99 points, or 0.67 per cent, to
 8975.46, its highest close since July 30. The Dow came within 10
 points of 9000 before backing down.
 The Nasdaq composite index posted an even stronger gain, rising
 19.46 points, or 1.1 per cent, to 1856.56
 ''The market has gone from complete despair a month ago to
 absolute exuberance at this point,'' said Dick Stein, chief
 technical analyst at Noble International Investments.
 Topping the gainers on the New York Stock Exchange was
 biotechnology company Geron Corp., which nearly doubled after
 news that laboratory researchers had grown human cells that could
 ultimately lead to advances in transplants, gene therapy and
 other fields.
 The breakthrough was based on research funded partly by Geron.
 Shares in the company closed at $17.19 (U.S.), up $7.31, and it
 was the most active stock on Nasdaq.
 Food and drug retailer Safeway Inc. was up $2.69 at $49.87 on
 news that it would replace Chrysler Corp. in the Standard &
 Poor's index of 500 stocks.
 The Standard & Poor's 500 index was up 7 points at 1141.01. The
 NYSE composite index rose 2.92 to 565.10, and the American Stock
 Exchange composite index was up 2.78 at 670.80.


LOAD-DATE: November 7, 1998


                              27 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1998 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                     November 7, 1998, Saturday, Edition 1

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 706 words

HEADLINE: CELL STUDY OFFERS NEW HOPE

BYLINE: Leslie Papp

BODY:

    Discovery opens door to replacing diseased organs

 'It's a breakthrough in cell therapy. This is a powerful
 approach.'
 Bob Hawley

 Toronto gene therapy researcher



 MEDICAL REPORTER

 The important discovery of a way to raise cells capable of
 turning into any kind of human tissue has scientists around the
 world rushing for a piece of the action.
 Count Bob Hawley among them.
 One of Canada's leading researchers in this field spent yesterday
 drafting a proposal to work with the U.S. pioneers who succeeded
 in growing these all-purpose stem cells.
 ''This is fantastic,'' said Hawley, scientific director of the
 oncology gene therapy program at The Toronto Hospital. ''I'm just
 about to courier a package to James Thomson with all of our
 research in it. We would love to collaborate with him, if
 possible.''
 Thomson, a developmental biologist at the University of
 Wisconsin, managed to harvest human stem cells just a few days
 after fertilization. His lab made them multiply, and then had
 different batches specialize into muscle cells, nerve cells,
 cartilage and bone.
 Growing entire organs using stem cells remains a long way off.
 But the discovery does open a path to creating new heart, liver,
 pancreas, bone marrow and nerve cells that could be implanted
 into people with spinal injuries, damaged hearts, diabetes, bone
 cancer, Parkinson's or other diseases.
 ''It's a breakthrough in cell therapy,'' said Hawley, who
 recently published a study in which he inserted genes into mouse
 stem cells and made them turn into a type of blood cell. ''This
 is a powerful approach.''
 He is to leave at the end of December to start a new job in
 Washington, D.C., investigating stem cells in the national
 research laboratories of the American Red Cross.
 Most of our bodies' cells are highly specialized, working as
 liver tissue, heart muscle, brain or bone, for example. But long
 before we developed these complex structures, we consisted of
 microscopic blobs of stem cells, each with the power to morph
 into any of the thousands of cell types we'd need in the future.
 Two teams of U.S. scientists have harnessed these cells and
 transformed them into specific types.
 Thomson's lab collected cells from blastocysts, or clumps of
 cells just a few days old, that had been grown in fertility
 clinics to make test-tube babies. He used leftover blastocysts
 that had been donated by parents. His findings were published in
 the journal Science yesterday.
 A second team of scientists, at Johns Hopkins University in
 Baltimore, grew cells from the immature egg- and sperm-forming
 tissue extracted from fetuses that had been aborted. Their
 findings are to appear in a future edition of the journal
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.
 The work of these two teams has jolted researchers like Hawley,
 but also right-to-life activists and ethicists concerned about
 the morality of exploiting human embryos.
 ''When human embryos become a commodity, it's extremely
 worrying,'' said Margaret Somerville, founding director of McGill
 University's Centre for Medicine, Ethics and Law.
 ''We shouldn't create human life to use strictly as a product.
 This (discovery) raises profound ethical and moral issues.''
 Suzanne Scorsone, a member of the Royal Commission on New
 Reproductive Technology and director of communications for the
 Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Toronto, describes the prospect of
 harvesting stem cells from the unborn as ''chilling.''
 ''It sounds ghoulish,'' said Jim Hughes, national president of
 the Campaign Life Coalition. ''I would fight like heck to see
 that this sort of thing is stopped.
 ''It dehumanizes the human race.''
 He remains unmoved by this technology's vast potential to heal
 the sick and injured.
 Mastering the mechanisms used by stem cells could help scientists
 understand and prevent birth defects. And these universal cells
 seem particularly open to genetic manipulation.
 ''It raises ethical issues, but it also opens up all kinds of
 opportunities,'' said Hawley.
 ''It's just amazing.''



LOAD-DATE: November 7, 1998


                              28 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1998 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                November 1, 1998, Sunday, SUNDAY SECOND EDITION

SECTION: The Ticket; Pg. D31

LENGTH: 691 words

HEADLINE: Science on the edge, not the fringe The Barmaid's Brain: And Other
Strange Tales From Science by Jay Ingram Viking, 271 pages, $29.99

BYLINE: By Michael Smith

BODY:

   Some weeks ago, a columnist at Another Morning Newspaper opined in print that
Canadian science writing was neglected and underfed. As if in response, here's a
new book by one of our best science journalists, the much-honoured Jay Ingram.

   Ingram is best known as the host of Discovery Channel's flagship science
show, @ discovery.ca, but he's no stranger to print. The Barmaid's Brain is his
seventh book; his sixth, The Burning House, won the 1995 book award from the
Canadian Science Writers' Association. He writes a weekly column in The Star's
science section. And for all those activities, last year Ingram won the Royal
Society of Canada's McNeil Medal for communicating science.

   The Barmaid's Brain is a collection of 21 science stories, most of them
pretty much off the beaten track. There's nothing about gene therapy or the hunt
for missing neutrinos. And UFO lovers can also forget it. This is science on the
edge, not on the fringe.

   But small stories are often as intriguing as the big ones, and perhaps more
accessible. In Ingram's hands, they also illustrate a central aspect of science
- sometimes the questions remain unanswered.

   So, for instance, Ingram digs into the mysterious way in which tits - English
birds rather like the chickadee - suddenly in the 1920s began prying open the
caps of milk bottles and drinking the cream. Ever since this larcenous behaviour
was first spotted, scientists have been trying to explain its origin and spread.
Ingram examines the main theories and concludes, reasonably enough, that none of
them is entirely convincing. There may never be an answer, he adds.

   But in other cases, there will be answers - it's just too early to expect
them. Research into why we laugh, for instance, is part of the continuing quest
to understand the human brain and mind. Right now, as Ingram points out, no one
knows much for certain about laughter, although there are hints and suggestions
and even experiments that shed some light. When the answers are in, it's likely
they'll arrive as part of a much larger package of understanding that
encompasses the whole brain.

   And some things are just oddities - such as the eponymous barmaid's brain. It
turns out that working in a Munich beer hall can actually cost you some mental
ability (although it probably enhances others.) Most of us - shown a drawing of
a tilted glass - can tell how the water level ought to look: horizontal. But
oddly, roughly 40 per cent of us can't. And even more oddly, barmaids in Munich
beer halls, whose job entails hauling heavy steins of beer, fare even worse:
only 28 per cent get it right.

   The conclusion drawn was that for barmaids, the important thing was not how
the beer level appeared with relation to the ground, but where it was in
relation to the lip of the stein. Their job, after all, is to get the beer to
the table without spilling. But in learning to do that well, they had lost an
ability most of us have.

   Another conclusion is that abilities can be lost or improved - and that's
borne out by other studies Ingram cites in the same chapter. Our memories are
all too limited, as anyone who's ever forgotten an appointment can attest. But
waiters and waitresses appear to have extraordinary memories.

   In one experiment, waitresses and students were tested on their ability to
remember drink orders from various sized groups. Overall, the students got 77
per cent of the orders right; the waitresses 90 per cent. But those numbers
include tests with small groups - on a group of 15 patrons, the waitresses
strikingly outperformed the students by 86 per cent to 68.

   The two sets of experiments may seem contradictory, but as Ingram points out,
they really aren't. "They illustrate that no matter how the human brain has come
together over time as a collection of different mental modules . . . that
collection is honed by evolution to serve its owner best, no matter what the
environment," he writes.

   The Barmaid's Brain is also honed - it's a sharp refutation of the claim
there is no good Canadian science writing.

   Toronto's Michael Smith is a freelance science journalist.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Jay Ingram COLOUR PHOTO (SHARIF TARABAY / FROM 'THE BARMAID'S
BRAIN' (VIKING): brain

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 1999


                              29 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1998 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                     October 5, 1998, Monday, METRO EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A3

LENGTH: 415 words

HEADLINE: Pill offers new way to treat genetic disorder Hemophiliacs, diabetics,
obese could benefit

BYLINE: (Reuters)

DATELINE: WELLINGTON

BODY:

   WELLINGTON (Reuters) - Hemophiliacs, diabetics and people with inherited
obesity all stand to benefit from a new way of treating genetic disorders
developed in New Zealand.

   An Auckland School of Medicine team, led by Professor Matthew During, has
perfected a one-dose pill to cure rats of the most common genetic disorder,
lactose intolerance.

   There is hope that similar methods could be used to treat a range of human
diseases.

   "This research brings gene therapy one step closer to the clinic," said
During.

   "Delivery of the gene has always been the problem, but this research makes it
feasible that we could give gene therapy orally - in a pill."

   The research, featured in the October issue of the international journal
Nature Medicine, clears the way for the development of a new generation of
treatments for genetic disorders, Auckland University said.

   "It is hoped the technology will be used to combat inherited conditions such
as hemophilia, diabetes and obesity within the next decade," the university
said.

   During, a molecular biologist, attached a gene responsible for production of
a lactose digesting enzyme to a virus found naturally in the stomach of the
rats.

   The b-galactosidase gene became incorporated into the cells lining the rats'
gastrointestinal tract, allowing them to metabolize lactose.

   Six months later, the rats remained lactose tolerant, suggesting that a
one-dose pill may be used to treat the same disorder in humans in the not too
distant future.

   "There are questions related to the long-term safety of gene delivery which
still need to be addressed, but we believe that the technology will lead to the
development of a single-shot oral vaccine in the future," During said.

   Lactose intolerance affects more than half the world's population, who are at
risk of calcium deficiency because of their inability to digest dairy products.

   A patent resulting from the research is held by Yale University where During
carried out much of his early research.

   The possible lactose treatment has been licensed to a commercial developer
and the team is moving on to widen its potential application.

   Genes are being sought that will be helpful in treating diabetes, obesity and
hemophilia, and there might also be applications in treating intestinal cancers,
he said.

   "If there was a hereditary cancer related to a gene mutation you could
potentially put in the healthy copy of the gene and try to target those cancer
cells."

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 1999


                              30 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1998 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                     October 2, 1998, Friday, METRO EDITION

SECTION: LIFE.health; Pg. E1

LENGTH: 341 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy may aid lactose intolerance

BYLINE: By Joseph Verrengia ASSOCIATED PRESS

BODY:

   An international research team has developed a possible genetic cure for
lactose intolerance, an inability to digest dairy products that afflicts half
the world's population.

   Lactose intolerance is a largely adult condition that can cause chronic
nausea, bloating, diarrhea and calcium deficiencies.

   It stems from a genetic deficiency that prevents the body from metabolizing
lactose, or milk sugar. It is the most common genetic disorder in the world.

   However, researchers in the United States and New Zealand say that injecting
a gene involved in the breakdown of milk sugar into the digestive tract of
lactose-intolerant rats allowed the animals to handle lactose.

   The findings were published this week in the journal Nature Medicine.

   Lactose intolerance affects more than 50 per cent of the population,
including 100 per cent of some Asian ethnic groups. In the United States, 50
million people are lactose intolerant, including most blacks and native Indians.

   But whether anyone will ever get a new gene to cure their lactose intolerance
is debatable.

   People with the condition can avoid any effects by staying away from dairy
products. Also, low-lactose milk is widely available in supermarkets, as are
over-the-counter tablets that aid in milk digestion.

   Gene researchers say the study makes new strides in gene therapy research
that could prove useful in treating other diseases and developing DNA-based
vaccines.

   In the study, researchers in the United States and New Zealand took a gene
that directs the production of an enzyme that breaks down milk sugars and
attached it to a group of viruses that easily infect cells in the digestive
system. The gene was then introduced into rats directly through a tube into
their digestive tracts.

   Rats with the new gene could tolerate lactose-rich food.

   Gene therapy thus far has been impractical in treating a variety of
gene-based illnesses. But the ease with which the lactose gene started working
in the rats' digestive tract encouraged researchers.

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 1999


                              31 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1998 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

             September 12, 1998, Saturday, SATURDAY SECOND EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A10

LENGTH: 490 words

HEADLINE: Cancer researcher honoured Pioneer in gene therapy from McMaster wins
$21,000 prize

BYLINE: By Ken Kilpatrick SPECIAL TO THE STAR

DATELINE: Hamilton

BODY:

   HAMILTON - An internationally renowned scientist from McMaster University
will receive Canada's top cancer research prize.

   Dr. Frank Graham, 56, a professor of biology, pathology and molecular
medicine, pioneered the development of tools for gene therapy when he worked in
Holland 20 years ago.

   "His innovative techniques of DNA transfer into cells are important technical
developments in molecular biology and are being used in labs all over the
world," Dr. Robert Phillips, executive director of the National Cancer Institute
of Canada, said yesterday.

   "Dr. Graham is a stellar Canadian scientist whose original contributions have
led to a number of outstanding efforts in cancer research," Phillips said.

   On Monday, Graham will receive the $21,000 Robert L. Noble prize from the
institute, the scientific partner of the Canadian Cancer Society, at a ceremony
at McMaster.

   Graham will give a public lecture on his work following the award ceremonies.

   Much of his work has concentrated on the adenovirus, an agent that causes the
common cold and other respiratory illnesses.

   He uses it as a vehicle to deliver foreign genes into cells.

   Gene therapy seeks to develop ways to deliver new genetic material to a
patient's cells safely and efficiently.

   Graham and his colleagues have been working on ways to shrink cancer tumours
for many years and just completed clinical trials in Toronto.

   They sent the adenovirus, containing an interleukin-2 gene, directly into a
tumour.

   Interleukin-2 is normally produced by the body to activate the immune system.

   And though it has been used for 10 years against cancer cells, problems
persist with side effects such as fever, nausea and low blood pressure.

   To counter these effects, Graham generated the interleukin-2 protein directly
inside the tumour by transferring the gene that makes it into the adenovirus.

   "There were some mildly encouraging results in a small number of patients,
but the bottom line is that we did not cure anybody," Graham said yesterday.

   But he also said new clinical trials will begin this fall, using newly
developed gene transfer vehicles that gave "much better responses with much less
toxicity" in mice.

   "So, as we are getting encouraging results in mice, we think there's reason
to try to see whether these approaches can work in the clinic, but it could be
five to 10 years before we even know whether or not we are on the right track."

   Two other prizes are also being awarded by the institute.

   The O. Harold Warwick prize honouring excellence in cancer control will go to
Dr. Brenda Gallie, head of the cancer and blood research program at the Hospital
for Sick Children.

   The William E. Rawls prize honouring promising researchers goes to: Dr.
Pamela Ohashi at the Toronto and Princess Margaret hospitals; Dr. Michael Tyers
at Mount Sinai Hospital; and Dr. Jeffrey Wrana at the Hospital for Sick
Children.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: FRANK GRAHAM: Getting top cancer research prize.

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 1999


                              32 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1998 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                    September 12, 1998, Saturday, Edition 1

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 544 words

HEADLINE: CANCER RESEARCHER HONOURED

BYLINE: Ken Kilpatrick

BODY:

    Pioneer in gene therapy from McMaster wins $21,000 prize


 SPECIAL TO THE STAR

    HAMILTON - An internationally renowned scientist from McMaster
 University will receive Canada's top cancer research prize.
   Dr. Frank Graham, 56, a professor of biology, pathology and
 molecular medicine, pioneered the development of tools for gene
 therapy when he worked in Holland 20 years ago.
    ''His innovative techniques of DNA transfer into cells are
 important technical developments in molecular biology and are
 being used in labs all over the world,'' Dr. Robert Phillips,
 executive director of the National Cancer Institute of Canada,
 said yesterday.
   ''Dr. Graham is a stellar Canadian scientist whose original
 contributions have led to a number of outstanding efforts in
 cancer research,'' Phillips said.
   On Monday, Graham will receive the $21,000 Robert L. Noble prize
 from the institute, the scientific partner of the Canadian Cancer
 Society, at a ceremony at McMaster.
   Graham will give a public lecture on his work following the award
 ceremonies.
   Much of his work has concentrated on the adenovirus, an agent
 that causes the common cold and other respiratory illnesses.
   He uses it as a vehicle to deliver foreign genes into cells.
   Gene therapy seeks to develop ways to deliver new genetic
 material to a patient's cells safely and efficiently.
   Graham and his colleagues have been working on ways to shrink
 cancer tumours for many years and just completed clinical trials
 in Toronto.
   They sent the adenovirus, containing an interleukin-2 gene,
 directly into a tumour.
   Interleukin-2 is normally produced by the body to activate the
 immune system.
   And though it has been used for 10 years against cancer cells,
 problems persist with side effects such as fever, nausea and low
 blood pressure.
   To counter these effects, Graham generated the interleukin-2
 protein directly inside the tumour by transferring the gene that
 makes it into the adenovirus.
   ''There were some mildly encouraging results in a small number of
 patients, but the bottom line is that we did not cure anybody,''
 Graham said yesterday.
   But he also said new clinical trials will begin this fall, using
 newly developed gene transfer vehicles that gave ''much better
 responses with much less toxicity'' in mice.
   ''So, as we are getting encouraging results in mice, we think
 there's reason to try to see whether these approaches can work in
 the clinic, but it could be five to 10 years before we even know
 whether or not we are on the right track.''
   Two other prizes are also being awarded by the institute.
   The O. Harold Warwick prize honouring excellence in cancer
 control will go to Dr. Brenda Gallie, head of the cancer and
 blood research program at the Hospital for Sick Children.
   The William E. Rawls prize honouring promising researchers goes
 to: Dr. Pamela Ohashi at the Toronto and Princess Margaret
 hospitals[semi] Dr. Michael Tyers at Mount Sinai Hospital[semi] and Dr.
 Jeffrey Wrana at the Hospital for Sick Children.



GRAPHIC: FRANK GRAHAM:
 Getting top cancer research prize.

LOAD-DATE: September 12, 1998


                              33 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1998 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                  September 12, 1998, Saturday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A10

LENGTH: 486 words

HEADLINE: Cancer researcher honoured Pioneer in gene therapy from McMaster wins
$ 21,000 prize

BYLINE: BY KEN KILPATRICK SPECIAL TO THE STAR

DATELINE: HamiltonCANCER RESEARCH DR. FRANK GRAHAM AGE AWARD BIOGRAPHY

BODY:

   An internationally renowned scientist from McMaster University will receive
Canada's top cancer research prize.

   Dr. Frank Graham, 56, a professor of biology, pathology and molecular
medicine, pioneered the development of tools for gene therapy when he worked in
Holland 20 years ago.

   "His innovative techniques of DNA transfer into cells are important technical
developments in molecular biology and are being used in labs all over the
world," Dr. Robert Phillips, executive director of the National Cancer Institute
of Canada, said yesterday.

   "Dr. Graham is a stellar Canadian scientist whose original contributions have
led to a number of outstanding efforts in cancer research," Phillips said.

   On Monday, Graham will receive the $ 21,000 Robert L. Noble prize from the
institute, the scientific partner of the Canadian Cancer Society, at a ceremony
at McMaster.

   Graham will give a public lecture on his work following the award ceremonies.

   Much of his work has concentrated on the adenovirus, an agent that causes the
common cold and other respiratory illnesses.

   He uses it as a vehicle to deliver foreign genes into cells.

   Gene therapy seeks to develop ways to deliver new genetic material to a
patient's cells safely and efficiently.

   Graham and his colleagues have been working on ways to shrink cancer tumours
for many years and just completed clinical trials in Toronto.

   They sent the adenovirus, containing an interleukin-2 gene, directly into a
tumour.

   Interleukin-2 is normally produced by the body to activate the immune system.

   And though it has been used for 10 years against cancer cells, problems
persist with side effects such as fever, nausea and low blood pressure.

   To counter these effects, Graham generated the interleukin-2 protein directly
inside the tumour by transferring the gene that makes it into the adenovirus.

   "There were some mildly encouraging results in a small number of patients,
but the bottom line is that we did not cure anybody," Graham said yesterday.

   But he also said new clinical trials will begin this fall, using newly
developed gene transfer vehicles that gave "much better responses with much less
toxicity" in mice.

   "So, as we are getting encouraging results in mice, we think there's reason
to try to see whether these approaches can work in the clinic, but it could be
five to 10 years before we even know whether or not we are on the right track."

   Two other prizes are also being awarded by the institute.

   The O. Harold Warwick prize honouring excellence in cancer control will go to
Dr. Brenda Gallie, head of the cancer and blood research program at the Hospital
for Sick Children.

   The William E. Rawls prize honouring promising researchers goes to: Dr.
Pamela Ohashi at the Toronto and Princess Margaret hospitals; Dr. Michael Tyers
at Mount Sinai Hospital; and Dr. Jeffrey Wrana at the Hospital for Sick
Children.


GRAPHIC: PHOTO: FRANK GRAHAM: Getting top cancer research prize.

LOAD-DATE: September 13, 1998


                              34 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1998 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                     August 28, 1998, Friday, METRO EDITION

SECTION: LIFE.health; Pg. F1

LENGTH: 504 words

HEADLINE: Tumour-starving drugs prompt optimism Treatments will complement other
therapies, doctor says

BYLINE: By Jonathan Bor SPECIAL TO THE STAR (BALTIMORE SUN)

BODY:

   A researcher who runs one of the United States' most closely watched cancer
labs says two new drugs that shrink tumours by starving them of their blood
supply will likely be used to augment older therapies before they will be used
alone.

   Dr. Judah Folkman, whose experiments touched off a media frenzy and a surge
of interest on Wall Street earlier this year, says he is encouraged by studies
at the University of Chicago showing one of the drugs dramatically improved the
effectiveness of radiation on cancerous mice.

   "No matter which therapies you use - chemotherapy, radiotherapy,
immunotherapy, gene therapy - the drugs will improve them," Folkman said after
giving a presentation to the annual meeting of the Institute of Human Virology
in Baltimore this week.

   The seven-day conference, which concluded yesterday, drew an international
audience of about 1,000 scientists - most of them engaged in AIDS and cancer
research.

   The meeting was organized by Dr. Robert Gallo, who directs the two-year-old
virology institute on the campus of the University of Maryland at Baltimore.

   Folkman has spent almost three decades showing, in various ways, that tumours
survive and spread by stimulating the growth of blood vessels that supply them
with the nourishment they need.

   Last November, his laboratory reported that two new drugs destroy tumours in
mice by depriving them of an adequate blood supply.

   In mid-May, a news report suggested the drugs - endostatin and angiostatin -
were emerging as possible cures, causing a brief surge of media excitement
followed by more cautious reports emphasizing that experimental results in mice
are often hard to reproduce in humans.

   Folkman says it could be at least a year before EntreMed, a Maryland
biotechnology company that has the licence to produce the drugs, has produced
enough to supply "a small number of patients" in the first clinical trials.

   Once trials begin, it could be several years before the drugs wind their way
through various levels of experimentation and - in the best scenario - prove
themselves as drugs suitable for widespread use.

   None of this has diminished Folkman's enthusiasm.

   Declaring it a "landmark" study, Folkman says he is encouraged by the
University of Chicago experiments that showed angiostatin combined with
radiation shrank tumours in mice far more effectively than radiation alone.

   He says the one-two punch, if applied to humans, could bring about faster
remissions while sparing patients the harsh side effects of radiation.

   Even if the drugs are eventually approved for human use, it could be several
years more before doctors use them alone rather than in combination with older
therapies.

   "Historically in medical practice, when you introduce something new, you
don't dare give up on what you've got," Folkman says.

   More than 20 angiogenesis inhibitors are already in small clinical trials,
but Folkman characterizes them as older drugs that either slow or arrest the
growth of tumours.

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 1999


                              35 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1998 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                     August 28, 1998, Friday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE.HEALTH; Pg. F1

LENGTH: 503 words

HEADLINE: Tumour-starving drugs prompt optimism Treatments will complement other
therapies, doctor says

BYLINE: BY JONATHAN BOR SPECIAL TO THE STAR (BALTIMORE SUN)CANCER RESEARCH DRUG
UNITED STATES

BODY:


    A researcher who runs one of the United States' most closely watched cancer
labs says two new drugs that shrink tumours by starving them of their blood
supply will likely be used to augment older therapies before they will be used
alone.

   Dr. Judah Folkman, whose experiments touched off a media frenzy and a surge
of interest on Wall Street earlier this year, says he is encouraged by studies
at the University of Chicago showing one of the drugs dramatically improved the
effectiveness of radiation on cancerous mice.

   "No matter which therapies you use - chemotherapy, radiotherapy,
immunotherapy, gene therapy - the drugs will improve them," Folkman said after
giving a presentation to the annual meeting of the Institute of Human Virology
in Baltimore this week.

   The seven-day conference, which concluded yesterday, drew an international
audience of about 1,000 scientists - most of them engaged in AIDS and cancer
research.

   The meeting was organized by Dr. Robert Gallo, who directs the two-year-old
virology institute on the campus of the University of Maryland at Baltimore.

   Folkman has spent almost three decades showing, in various ways, that tumours
survive and spread by stimulating the growth of blood vessels that supply them
with the nourishment they need.

   Last November, his laboratory reported that two new drugs destroy tumours in
mice by depriving them of an adequate blood supply.

   In mid-May, a news report suggested the drugs - endostatin and angiostatin -
were emerging as possible cures, causing a brief surge of media excitement
followed by more cautious reports emphasizing that experimental results in mice
are often hard to reproduce in humans.

   Folkman says it could be at least a year before EntreMed, a Maryland
biotechnology company that has the licence to produce the drugs, has produced
enough to supply "a small number of patients" in the first clinical trials.

   Once trials begin, it could be several years before the drugs wind their way
through various levels of experimentation and - in the best scenario - prove
themselves as drugs suitable for widespread use.

   None of this has diminished Folkman's enthusiasm.

   Declaring it a "landmark" study, Folkman says he is encouraged by the
University of Chicago experiments that showed angiostatin combined with
radiation shrank tumours in mice far more effectively than radiation alone.

   He says the one-two punch, if applied to humans, could bring about faster
remissions while sparing patients the harsh side effects of radiation.

   Even if the drugs are eventually approved for human use, it could be several
years more before doctors use them alone rather than in combination with older
therapies.

   "Historically in medical practice, when you introduce something new, you
don't dare give up on what you've got," Folkman says.

   More than 20 angiogenesis inhibitors are already in small clinical trials,
but Folkman characterizes them as older drugs that either slow or arrest the
growth of tumours.


LOAD-DATE: August 29, 1998


                              36 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1998 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                    August 13, 1998, Thursday, METRO EDITION

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. A20

LENGTH: 573 words

HEADLINE: Stingy budgets uproot medical stars

BODY:

   The decision of a key genetic researcher to leave The Toronto Hospital for
the U.S. highlights a growing concern of Canada's scientific community.

   Dr. Robert Hawley, director of research into gene therapy, a promising area
of cancer research, is going to Washington to set up a program to genetically
engineer bone marrow stem cells for the American Red Cross. It will increase his
research budget five-fold.

   This is a tale too often told. Cuts to research funding in the slash-and-burn
era have damaged medical research in Canada and continue to damage it.

   They have left us unable to keep our best researchers, sustain the quality of
our health system or compete effectively in the growing market for health
technologies.

   The problem is not the quality of scientists Canada is producing. Dr. Hawley,
like many others heading south, made his international reputation in Canada.

   Rather, it is the lack of money to fund their work.

   Canada's spending on medical research, in fact, is the lowest among the Group
of Seven most industrialized countries.

   And while Canada has cut medical research funding, the United States, France
and Britain have all increased their spending by more than 20 per cent.

   On a per capita basis, federal direct spending on research fell from $8.70 to
$8.20 from 1991 to 1997, while comparable U.S. spending rose from about $40 per
capita to $67. By 2001, the Canadian number is to rise to $9.51 but U.S.
spending is projected to reach $82 per capita.

   The biggest single source of Canadian funding is the federal Medical Research
Council, which provides about $250 million.

   Another $200 million comes from voluntary fund-raising by groups like the
Canadian Cancer Society, the Heart and Stroke Foundation and others.

   The provinces - except for Quebec and Alberta, which dedicate specified funds
to research - focus on operating the health delivery system. They leave to
Ottawa the direct funding of research projects.

   With funding unavailable, uncertain or inadequate, Canadian researchers look
increasingly to the U.S. to fund the work they educated themselves to do.

   Dr. Robert Phillips, executive director of the National Cancer Institute of
Canada, says half of the requests to the institute deserve funding, but only
one-quarter get it.

   Faced with this, Canadian scientists in a number of disciplines are beginning
to coalesce around the idea of creating specialized health institutes, similar
to those in the U.S., to focus Canadian medical research.

   Researchers believe $500 million in new federal money is needed; about double
the combined existing federal and voluntary funding.

   It would be unfortunate if medical research funding got caught up in the
on-going federal-provincial tug-of-war over health spending. Ottawa has
traditionally funded medical research.

   Years of underfunding have not only damaged our medical research capacity but
undermined the provinces' efforts to maintain the over-all quality of the health
system.

   That needs to change, before our best researchers disappear into the
well-funded labs to the south and public confidence in the health system is
further eroded.

   A federal commitment to repair the damage done to medical research is in the
interest of both researchers and hospitals. It would also help the provinces do
a better job on health. They should welcome it with open arms.

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 1999


                              37 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1998 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                      August 13, 1998, Thursday, Edition 1

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 589 words

HEADLINE: STINGY BUDGETS
 UPROOT MEDICAL STARS

BODY:

    The decision of a key genetic researcher to leave The Toronto
 Hospital for the U.S. highlights a growing concern of Canada's
 scientific community.
 Dr. Robert Hawley, director of research into gene therapy, a
 promising area of cancer research, is going to Washington to set
 up a program to genetically engineer bone marrow stem cells for
 the American Red Cross. It will increase his research budget
 five-fold.
 This is a tale too often told. Cuts to research funding in the
 slash-and-burn era have damaged medical research in Canada and
 continue to damage it.
 They have left us unable to keep our best researchers, sustain
 the quality of our health system or compete effectively in the
 growing market for health technologies.
 The problem is not the quality of scientists Canada is producing.
 Dr. Hawley, like many others heading south, made his
 international reputation in Canada.
 Rather, it is the lack of money to fund their work.
 Canada's spending on medical research, in fact, is the lowest
 among the Group of Seven most industrialized countries.
 And while Canada has cut medical research funding, the United
 States, France and Britain have all increased their spending by
 more than 20 per cent.
 On a per capita basis, federal direct spending on research fell
 from $8.70 to $8.20 from 1991 to 1997, while comparable U.S.
 spending rose from about $40 per capita to $67. By 2001, the
 Canadian number is to rise to $9.51 but U.S. spending is
 projected to reach $82 per capita.
 The biggest single source of Canadian funding is the federal
 Medical Research Council, which provides about $250 million.
 Another $200 million comes from voluntary fund-raising by groups
 like the Canadian Cancer Society, the Heart and Stroke Foundation
 and others.
 The provinces - except for Quebec and Alberta, which dedicate
 specified funds to research - focus on operating the health
 delivery system. They leave to Ottawa the direct funding of
 research projects.
 With funding unavailable, uncertain or inadequate, Canadian
 researchers look increasingly to the U.S. to fund the work they
 educated themselves to do.
 Dr. Robert Phillips, executive director of the National Cancer
 Institute of Canada, says half of the requests to the institute
 deserve funding, but only one-quarter get it.
 Faced with this, Canadian scientists in a number of disciplines
 are beginning to coalesce around the idea of creating specialized
 health institutes, similar to those in the U.S., to focus
 Canadian medical research.
 Researchers believe $500 million in new federal money is needed[semi]
 about double the combined existing federal and voluntary funding.
 It would be unfortunate if medical research funding got caught up
 in the on-going federal-provincial tug-of-war over health
 spending. Ottawa has traditionally funded medical research.
 Years of underfunding have not only damaged our medical research
 capacity but undermined the provinces' efforts to maintain the
 over-all quality of the health system.
 That needs to change, before our best researchers disappear into
 the well-funded labs to the south and public confidence in the
 health system is further eroded.
 A federal commitment to repair the damage done to medical
 research is in the interest of both researchers and hospitals. It
 would also help the provinces do a better job on health. They
 should welcome it with open arms.



LOAD-DATE: August 13, 1998


                              38 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1998 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                    August 5, 1998, Wednesday, METRO EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 527 words

HEADLINE: Top gene scientist heading to the U.S. Toronto Hospital expert points
to funding fears

BYLINE: By Leslie Papp TORONTO STAR

BODY:

   Gene therapy expert Robert Hawley is quitting Toronto for the United States -
a move he says was prompted by uncertainty over funding after hospital
restructuring.

   "It's hard to live day-by-day when you don't have funding guaranteed," said
Hawley, scientific director of the oncology gene therapy program at The Toronto
Hospital.

   He is to leave at the end of December and start a new job in Washington,
D.C., at the national research laboratories of the American Red Cross.

   "It's a big loss," said Dr. Robert Phillips, executive director of the
National Cancer Institute of Canada. He has known Hawley since the departing
genetics expert was a student.

   "We don't have many people working in gene therapy. Whenever we lose someone
of Bob's stature and international reputation, we're exporting a valuable
resource."

   Hawley is to launch a new program in Washington aimed at genetically
engineering bone marrow stem cells so that they can fight inherited blood
diseases.

   "They made me an offer I just couldn't refuse," said Hawley, estimating that
his new program will get five times more funding than the less-than-$500,000
currently allocated yearly to his Toronto operation.

   And even that funding has been uncertain with the amalgamation of The Toronto
Hospital and Princess Margaret Hospital a year ago, he said.

   "There has been a lot of reorganization. Even though we have one of the
country's foremost gene therapy programs, ,1,0 there were no guarantees the
program would continue."

   But Christopher Paige, vice-president of research for the amalgamated
hospitals, said gene therapy remains a high priority and will receive more money
rather than being cut.

   "With the overall integration of the (hospital) structures, there is an
expected transition period which Bob may have interpreted as a withdrawal of
support," Paige said. "But our program is going to go forward.

   "We're disappointed that Bob's leaving but, in our business, good people are
always leaving. Sometimes Toronto Hospital is recruiting good people from
somewhere else. Worried about his future, Hawley explored going to the U.S. and
was quickly snapped up by the Red Cross.

   That organization is committed to spending millions in start-up costs -
creating a new lab for Hawley, complete with the latest high-tech gear. And
there will also be a Red Cross job for his wife, Teresa Hawley, a published
researcher who works as co-ordiator of the Toronto gene therapy program.

   His own salary will almost double, Hawley says. "That really wasn't my
motivation (for the move) but, to be frank, I can't complain."

   Hawley is not alone in heading south. His predecessor in charge of the
Toronto Hospital program, Dr. Gordon Mills, also left for the United States,
accepting a job at the M. D. Anderson Cancer Centre, in Houston.

   "It's somewhat ironic," said Hawley, rapping his knuckles on the furniture in
his office. "This was his desk."

   Phillips said top researchers are departing throughout the Canadian
scientific community.

   "Every time I talk to Canadian scientists they tell me they're receiving
inquiries from U.S. institutions," he says.

GRAPHIC: STAR COLOUR PHOTO (CHERYL HNATIUK): BIG LOSS: Robert Hawley got an
offer he couldn't refuse from the American Red Cross.

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 1999


                              39 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1998 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                      August 5, 1998, Wednesday, Edition 1

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 616 words

HEADLINE: TOP GENE SCIENTIST HEADING TO THE U.S.

BYLINE: Leslie Papp

BODY:

    'There has been a lot of reorganization. Even though we have one
 of the country's foremost gene therapy programs, there were no
 guarantees the program would continue.'Robert Hawley



 Toronto Hospital expert points to funding fears
 U.S.

 U.S. Red Cross snaps up
 top Toronto gene expert


 MEDICAL REPORTER

 Gene therapy expert Robert Hawley is quitting Toronto for the
 United States - a move he says was prompted by uncertainty over
 funding after hospital restructuring.
 ''It's hard to live day-by-day when you don't have funding
 guaranteed,'' said Hawley, scientific director of the oncology
 gene therapy program at The Toronto Hospital.
 He is to leave at the end of December and start a new job in
 Washington, D.C., at the national research laboratories of the
 American Red Cross.
 ''It's a big loss,'' said Dr. Robert Phillips, executive director
 of the National Cancer Institute of Canada. He has known Hawley
 since the departing genetics expert was a student.
 ''We don't have many people working in gene therapy. Whenever we
 lose someone of Bob's stature and international reputation, we're
 exporting a valuable resource.''
 Hawley is to launch a new program in Washington aimed at
 genetically engineering bone marrow stem cells so that they can
 fight inherited blood diseases.
 ''They made me an offer I just couldn't refuse,'' said Hawley,
 estimating that his new program will get five times more funding
 than the less-than-$500,000 currently allocated yearly to his
 Toronto operation.
 And even that funding has been uncertain with the amalgamation of
 The Toronto Hospital and Princess Margaret Hospital a year ago,
 he said.
 ''There has been a lot of reorganization. Even though we have one
 of the country's foremost gene therapy programs, there were no
 guarantees the program would continue.''
 But Christopher Paige, vice-president of research for the
 amalgamated hospitals, said gene therapy remains a high priority
 and will receive more money rather than being cut.
 ''With the overall integration of the (hospital) structures,
 there is an expected transition period which Bob may have
 interpreted as a withdrawal of support,'' Paige said. ''But our
 program is going to go forward.
 ''We're disappointed that Bob's leaving but, in our business,
 good people are always leaving. Sometimes Toronto Hospital is
 recruiting good people from somewhere else. Worried about his
 future, Hawley explored going to the U.S. and was quickly snapped
 up by the Red Cross.
 Hawley's predecessor at Toronto Hospital also left for the U.S.
 That organization is committed to spending millions in start-up
 costs - creating a new lab for Hawley, complete with the latest
 high-tech gear. And there will also be a Red Cross job for his
 wife, Teresa Hawley, a published researcher who works as
 co-ordiator of the Toronto gene therapy program.
 His own salary will almost double, Hawley says. ''That really
 wasn't my motivation (for the move) but, to be frank, I can't
 complain.''
 Hawley is not alone in heading south. His predecessor in charge
 of the Toronto Hospital program, Dr. Gordon Mills, also left for
 the United States, accepting a job at the M. D. Anderson Cancer
 Centre, in Houston.
 ''It's somewhat ironic,'' said Hawley, rapping his knuckles on
 the furniture in his office. ''This was his desk.''
 Phillips said top researchers are departing throughout the
 Canadian scientific community.
 ''Every time I talk to Canadian scientists they tell me they're
 receiving inquiries from U.S. institutions,'' he says.



GRAPHIC: CHERYL HNATIUK/TORONTO STAR
 BIG LOSS:
 Robert Hawley got an offer he couldn't refuse from the American Red Cross.

LOAD-DATE: August 5, 1998


                              40 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1998 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                     July 30, 1998, Thursday, METRO EDITION

SECTION: OPINION; Pg. A17

LENGTH: 654 words

HEADLINE: There may be some good things about cloning humans

BYLINE: By Tom Ford

DATELINE: OTTAWA

BODY:

   OTTAWA - If you weren't too fussy about the information technology
revolution, you're going to hate the next explosion of change: genetic commerce.

   Corporations and their scientists are getting ready to manipulate genes - the
basic building blocks of life - patent the results and sell them to couples
wanting a perfect child or people who want spare body parts.

   Few of the breakthroughs in this field are coming overnight, but they are on
their way.

   Unfortunately, the federal government is poorly prepared to handle the
problems they bring. Part of the reason for this is that the federal health
department is a shambles, a problem that may be fixed by a new deputy minister,
David Dodge, the former federal deputy minister of finance.

   Mostly, however, the government has been slow to react because the field is a
difficult one. Some possibilities in genetic commerce seem to lead to ethical
swamps. But many of the developments may make life more pleasant for more
people.

   Cloning humans, for example, has been banned in 19 European countries and has
caused an uproar in the United States. But if cloning is only taken to the
tissue stage, then the tissue could be used to help persons with brain disease
or bad burns, without fear of rejection because the implant would be genetically
the same as the host.

   "After thousands of years of fusing, melting, soldering and forging inert
material, we are now splicing, recombining, inserting and stitching living
material," says Jeremy Rifkin the U.S. author of The Biotech Century: Harnessing
The Gene And Remaking The World, and a critic of some aspects of genetic
commerce.

   "In the decades to come, we might barter ourselves away, a gene at a time, in
exchange for some measure of temporary well-being," he says.

   The federal Liberals first bumped into the problem less than a month after
taking office in 1993. They were handed the report (with 293 recommendations) of
the Royal Commission on New Reproductive Technologies, which spent four years
and $30 million on public hearings and research.

   The commission wanted a ban on various reproductive technologies and the
creation of a regulatory body to oversee the baby makers.

   In 1995, the government called for a voluntary ban on nine reproductive
technologies, but was soon forced to admit the ban wasn't working.

   In response, in June, 1996, the government tabled Bill C-47, a six-page bill
that banned human cloning; research on human embryos outside the human body;
human-animal hybrids; gene therapy that would alter future generations; paying
donors for their sperm or eggs; paying surrogate mothers to carry a child for an
infertile couple; diagnoses involving embryos that let parents, for non-medical
reasons, choose the gender of their baby; and removing sperm or eggs from
fetuses or human corpses.

   It did not, however, propose the regulatory commission recommended by the
royal commission.

   The bill was met with some cheering, but a lot of boos, some from heavyweight
organizations such as the Canadian Medical Association and the Canadian Bar
Association which felt it was simplistic and cut off a lot of useful research.

   The bill died on the order paper, and Health Minister Allan Rock says it's
being reviewed, while he juggles his other programs such as blood, tobacco
sponsorship rules and election promises on homecare and pharmacare.

   Meanwhile, genetic commerce is growing in Canada. A March report by the
National Biotechnology Advisory Committee (NBAC) says Canada can lead in the $50
billion market in biotechnology products in the next millennium.

   It says Canada can capture $5 billion in biotechnology sales by 2005, if
Ottawa pumps more money into companies and sets up an advisory body reporting to
federal Industry Minister John Manley.

   In seeking answers to the problems of genetic commerce, Rock may want first
to talk to Manley.

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 1999


                              41 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1998 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                       July 30, 1998, Thursday, Edition 1

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 693 words

HEADLINE: THERE MAY BE SOME GOOD THINGS ABOUT CLONING HUMANS

BYLINE: Tom Ford

BODY:

    OTTAWA - If you weren't too fussy about the information
 technology revolution, you're going to hate the next explosion of
 change: genetic commerce.
 Corporations and their scientists are getting ready to manipulate
 genes - the basic building blocks of life - patent the results
 and sell them to couples wanting a perfect child or people who
 want spare body parts.
 Few of the breakthroughs in this field are coming overnight, but
 they are on their way.
 Unfortunately, the federal government is poorly prepared to
 handle the problems they bring. Part of the reason for this is
 that the federal health department is a shambles, a problem that
 may be fixed by a new deputy minister, David Dodge, the former
 federal deputy minister of finance.
 Mostly, however, the government has been slow to react because
 the field is a difficult one. Some possibilities in genetic
 commerce seem to lead to ethical swamps. But many of the
 developments may make life more pleasant for more people.
 Cloning humans, for example, has been banned in 19 European
 countries and has caused an uproar in the United States. But if
 cloning is only taken to the tissue stage, then the tissue could
 be used to help persons with brain disease or bad burns, without
 fear of rejection because the implant would be genetically the
 same as the host.
 ''After thousands of years of fusing, melting, soldering and
 forging inert material, we are now splicing, recombining,
 inserting and stitching living material,'' says Jeremy Rifkin the
 U.S. author of The Biotech Century: Harnessing The Gene And
 Remaking The World, and a critic of some aspects of genetic
 commerce.
 ''In the decades to come, we might barter ourselves away, a gene
 at a time, in exchange for some measure of temporary
 well-being,'' he says.
 The federal Liberals first bumped into the problem less than a
 month after taking office in 1993. They were handed the report
 (with 293 recommendations) of the Royal Commission on New
 Reproductive Technologies, which spent four years and $30 million
 on public hearings and research.
 The commission wanted a ban on various reproductive technologies
 and the creation of a regulatory body to oversee the baby makers.
 In 1995, the government called for a voluntary ban on nine
 reproductive technologies, but was soon forced to admit the ban
 wasn't working.
 In response, in June, 1996, the government tabled Bill C-47, a
 six-page bill that banned human cloning[semi] research on human
 embryos outside the human body[semi] human-animal hybrids[semi] gene
 therapy that would alter future generations[semi] paying donors for
 their sperm or eggs[semi] paying surrogate mothers to carry a child
 for an infertile couple[semi] diagnoses involving embryos that let
 parents, for non-medical reasons, choose the gender of their
 baby[semi] and removing sperm or eggs from fetuses or human corpses.
 It did not, however, propose the regulatory commission
 recommended by the royal commission.
 The bill was met with some cheering, but a lot of boos, some from
 heavyweight organizations such as the Canadian Medical
 Association and the Canadian Bar Association which felt it was
 simplistic and cut off a lot of useful research.
 The bill died on the order paper, and Health Minister Allan Rock
 says it's being reviewed, while he juggles his other programs
 such as blood, tobacco sponsorship rules and election promises on
 homecare and pharmacare.
 Meanwhile, genetic commerce is growing in Canada. A March report
 by the National Biotechnology Advisory Committee (NBAC) says
 Canada can lead in the $50 billion market in biotechnology
 products in the next millennium.
 It says Canada can capture $5 billion in biotechnology sales by
 2005, if Ottawa pumps more money into companies and sets up an
 advisory body reporting to federal Industry Minister John Manley.
 In seeking answers to the problems of genetic commerce, Rock may
 want first to talk to Manley.

 Tom Ford is managing editor of the Issues Network.



LOAD-DATE: July 30, 1998


                              42 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1998 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                May 30, 1998, Saturday, SATURDAY SECOND EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A18

LENGTH: 400 words

HEADLINE: Scientists find malaria vaccine Offers new hope against ancient
scourge

BYLINE: NEWSDAY

DATELINE: SEATTLE

BODY:

   SEATTLE (Special) - After decades of searching and dismal results, scientists
have developed a vaccine effective against one of the most widespread and
devastating diseases in the world, malaria.

   The new vaccine, under study by U.S. Navy researchers, is based on injection
of purified genes - so-called "naked DNA" - directly into muscle tissue.

   Development of the vaccine has not yet been announced publicly, but it was
discussed yesterday during the first annual meeting of the American Society of
Gene Therapy.

   Tests show that the muscle cells can absorb a small amount of DNA, read its
genetic message and make the protein specified by the gene, in this case a
malaria gene. The protein's presence then alerts the immune system that an
infection may be occurring, touching off a strong protective response without
incurring the disease itself.

   Although the naval researchers expect to publish their initial results soon,
the vaccine still must undergo large-scale efficacy testing before it becomes
available.

   Richard Hedstrom, director of molecular biology at the Naval Medical Research
Institute in Rockville, Md., said yesterday that early testing in volunteers has
shown "much higher protection, dramatically higher protection" than other
candidate vaccines. And he said the tests showed it also "is very well tolerated
. . . even at the highest doses."

   Vaccine specialists say the beauty of the naked DNA approach is that it fires
up the entire immune system, not just the blood-borne response that produces
antibodies.

   Malaria is a debilitating disease that destroys red blood cells and in some
cases enters the brain, causing death. It has been difficult to attack because
it has several life-cycle stages in which it enters the blood, goes to the
liver, multiplies rapidly, then infects red blood cells. Mature parasites
circulate with the blood, and then can be picked up by mosquitoes and passed on
to other victims.

   PESTICIDE RESISTANCE

   In the past, malaria was partially controlled by a worldwide attack on
mosquitoes.

   But since World War II, mosquitoes gradually have developed genetic
resistance to pesticides such as DDT, and malaria has rebounded tragically.

   Now, hundreds of millions of people are infected, and millions more become
infected annually in tropical areas.

   An estimated 2 million to 3 million people die yearly worldwide.

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 1999


                              43 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1998 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                      May 7, 1998, Thursday, METRO EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A2

LENGTH: 247 words

HEADLINE: St. Mike's gets heart lab New facility to do pioneering cardiac
research

BYLINE: By Leslie Papp Toronto Star

BODY:

   St. Michael's Hospital has a new lab for cardiovascular research where
scientists will try to turn the latest advances in genetics and molecular
engineering into practical treatments for heart patients.

   "State-of-the-art equipment will let researchers from various backgrounds
come together to pursue cutting-edge research," says Dr. Duncan Stewart, chief
of cardiology at St. Mike's. "This facility is unique in Canada."

   The 8,000-square-foot lab is one of the largest of its kind in North America,
Stewart said at the facility's official opening yesterday.

   Experiments to be conducted are to include pioneering work using gene therapy
to grow new blood vessels.

   If successful, the approach could revolutionize cardiac care by having
patients grow new vessels instead of undergoing bypass surgery.

   The lab was made possible by a $2 million donation from Toronto lawyer
Terrence Donnelly, 63.

   "I don't look upon this as a donation, I look upon it as an investment in
benefits for the future," he said at the opening. "This facility is going to pay
dividends for generations of future patients."

   It's hoped the lab will help the hospital attract top researchers from across
Canada and the United States, he said.

   It will also serve as a teaching centre, allowing young scientists at the
University of Toronto to rub shoulders with some of Canada's top researchers,
said Dr. Lee Errett, chief of cardiovascular and thoracic surgery at St. Mike's.

GRAPHIC: Star photo (Mahler): STATE OF THE ART: Terrence Donnelly, left, whose$2
million donation funded St. Michael's new lab, is shown DNA testing equipment by
Dr. Duncan Stewart.

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 1999


                              44 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1998 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                      May 7, 1998, Thursday, METRO EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A2

LENGTH: 569 words

HEADLINE: New tumour drug tested on humans British, Swedish and California
doctors involved

BYLINE: By Mark Egan Reuters News Agency

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES

BODY:

   LOS ANGELES - A potential treatment for cancer that kills tumours by starving
them of their blood supply is being tested on humans by doctors at the
University of California here, researchers reported yesterday.

   And British doctors and a Swedish-American medical company said they expect
to begin human trials of another new cancer drug, combretastatin, in September.

   Both drugs are alternatives to angiostatin and endostatin, two drugs that
attracted worldwide interest this week after tests in the United States showed
they wiped out tumours in mice.

   The two drugs, angiostatin and endostatin, are 12 to 18 months away from
being tested on humans.

   Unlike conventional treatments that target the cancer cells themselves, all
four drugs "starve" the cancer by selectively damaging blood vessels that supply
the cells with the oxygen and nutrients they need to survive and grow.

   The process of growing arteries is called angiogenesis, so drugs that act in
this way are known as angiogenesis inhibitors.

   The drug being tested at the University of California, Los Angeles, is called
SU5416. It has been in Phase I trials on 30 patients since September after
wiping out tumours in mice, researchers said.

   Phase I trials try to determine dosage, side effects and a schedule for
treatment. Subsequent Phase II and Phase III trials study how effective the drug
is at treating cancer.

   "We are very excited about this experimental treatment," said UCLA's Dr. Lee
Rosen yesterday. "In the lab, SU5416 made all kinds of tumours shrink or die, no
matter where in the (mouse) body they were. We're hoping for exactly the same
results in humans."

   Oxigene, a Swedish medical technology company that last year moved its
headquarters to Boston, said it would start clinical tests of the other drug,
combretastatin, in September.

   Combretastatin is a manmade derivative of the extract of the African Bush
Willow. It was discovered by Prof. Bob Pettit, of Arizona State University,
which has licensed it to Oxigene.

   Amid the race to develop a cure for cancer, researcher Judah Folkman preached
caution.

   Even if the two drugs that have eliminated tumours in mice are effective in
humans someday, they will not replace other cancer treatments, said Folkman,
whose lab is credited with the discovery.

   "However they will be used, they will be added to chemotherapy and
radiotherapy and gene therapy and immunotherapy and vaccine therapy," he said.

   Folkman, a doctor at Children's Hospital and Harvard Medical School, said he
cancelled a keynote speech scheduled for today at a Boston symposium on prostate
cancer because he was concerned about the recent media attention on the drugs.

   He noted that they eliminated cancer only in mice. "It's got a ways to go to
get into people, but there is hope to get there."

   The drugs are among more than 300 new treatments for cancer being tested,
ranging from those that directly target tumours, to vaccines that turn the
body's defences against tumours, to gene therapy that aims to stop cancer at the
most basic level.

   Since cancer cells divide much faster than other cells in the body, they need
more nourishment from blood to stay alive. Blocking that blood supply kills the
tumour.

   "This drug made tumours disappear in mice, and we're very hopeful, but it's
very far away from being the miracle cure for human cancers," Rosen said of
SU5416.

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 1999


                              45 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1998 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                        May 7, 1998, Thursday, Edition 1

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 287 words

HEADLINE: ST. MIKE'S GETS HEART LAB

BYLINE: Leslie Papp

BODY:


    New facility
    to do pioneering cardiac research



 MEDICAL REPORTER

    St. Michael's Hospital has a new lab for cardiovascular research
 where scientists will try to turn the latest advances in genetics
 and molecular engineering into practical treatments for heart
 patients.
     State-of-the-art equipment will let researchers from various
 backgrounds come together to pursue cutting-edge research,'' says
 Dr. Duncan Stewart, chief of cardiology at St. Mike's.  This
 facility is unique in Canada.''
    The 8,000-square-foot lab is one of the largest of its kind in
 North America, Stewart said at the facility's official opening
 yesterday.
 NEW BLOOD VESSELS

     Experiments to be conducted are to include pioneering work using
 gene therapy to grow new blood vessels.
    If successful, the approach could revolutionize cardiac care by
 having patients grow new vessels instead of undergoing bypass
 surgery.
    The lab was made possible by a $2 million donation from Toronto
 lawyer Terrence Donnelly, 63.
     I don't look upon this as a donation, I look upon it as an
 investment in benefits for the future,'' he said at the opening.
 This facility is going to pay dividends for generations of
 future patients.''
    It's hoped the lab will help the hospital attract top researchers
 from across Canada and the United States, he said.
    It will also serve as a teaching centre, allowing young
 scientists at the University of Toronto to rub shoulders with
 some of Canada's top researchers, said Dr. Lee Errett, chief of
 cardiovascular and thoracic surgery at St. Mike's.



GRAPHIC: JOHN MAHLER/TORONTO STAR

 STATE OF THE ART:
 Terrence Donnelly, left, whose $2 million donation funded St. Michael's new
lab, is shown DNA testing equipment by Dr. Duncan Stewart.

LOAD-DATE: May 7, 1998


                              46 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1998 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                    March 12, 1998, Thursday, METRO EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. E3

LENGTH: 726 words

HEADLINE: Experimental procedure is final hope for Jacob Baby suffers from
extremely rare genetic disorder

BYLINE: By Leslie Papp Toronto Star

BODY:

   Jacob Schwartz doesn't look like he's been stricken by a deadly illness.

   He's a giggling, chubby 9-month-old who loves hugs and funny noises. But
Jacob has a rare genetic disorder and he isn't likely to see his 10th birthday
unless experimental gene therapy can cure him.

   The Toronto boy is one of only 15 children in North America enrolled in a
cutting-edge study being done by scientists at Yale University School of
Medicine. Next month they're to inject a batch of artificially produced gene
material into his brain in the hope that this can replace a mutated gene he
inherited and which has left him with fatal Canavan's disease.

   "If this works, it could help cure many other neurological disorders, so it's
pretty important," says Jacob's mother, Ellen Schwartz, 30. "And, if we don't do
it, Jacob's just going to die. This is the only possible answer."

   Canavan's disease is extremely rare - so rare that Jacob is only the second
case seen at Toronto's Hospital for Sick Children in 10 years.

   It's caused by a mutant gene that prevents the formation of myelin, a fatty
substance that sheaths the body's nerves and acts much as insulation does around
an electric wire.

   Children affected by Canavan's have difficulty holding their heads up and can
never walk, talk, sit up, or play. Death usually occurs in the first 10 years of
life, with the patient's head becoming progressively enlarged as the brain
swells.

   Compared to what the future holds, Jacob remains in relatively good shape,
says Schwartz. "If you saw him on the street you'd never know he was sick; he's
very healthy looking, very cheerful."

   Despite his robust appearance, Jacob can't hold his head up, except for
moments at a time, and he can't see. His eyes function, but nerve damage, due to
lack of myelin, is blocking the visual messages being sent toward his brain, his
mother says. Jacob does, however, have extremely acute hearing and is quick to
laugh, especially at high-pitched, squeaky tones.

   "He has a great sense of humour," Schwartz says with a sigh. "He's
wonderful."

   Jacob's future rests with a study being conducted by neuroscientist Paola
Leone and fellow researchers at Yale. They injected four children in January
with a gene engineered to boost myelin production, and plan to treat four more
by the end of this month. Jacob's turn is expected to come in April.

   "We're trying to replace the defective gene by putting a healthy gene into
the brain cells of children with Canavan's," says Leone, adding it's too early
to see any results in the first children injected.

   Shortly before Jacob is taken to Yale, doctors at the Hospital for Sick
Children are to install in his head a shunt, or tube, that U.S. scientists will
use to send the gene material into the fluid of his brain. After the treatment,
specialists at Sick Kids are to monitor his progress with examinations and brain
wave measurements.

   "We hope to see an improvement after the injections," says Dr. Anne
Feigenbaum, of the hospital's genetics metabolic disease program. "That's what
we'll be documenting."

   If it works, the same method of injecting genetic material into the brain
could be applied to other neurodegenerative diseases, such as Alzheimer's,
Feigenbaum says. Because Canavan's involves a single gene mutation, affecting a
relatively simple enzyme, it's "a good candidate" for a trail-blazing study.

   Six times over the year following his injection, Jacob will be taken to
Philadelphia, where scientists will examine his progress with special scans.

   Biochemical changes should be evident within about three months, Leone says,
adding that improved myelin levels might be seen around eight months to a year.

   This is a "phase one" study, meaning its primary goal is to determine whether
the injected genetic material is safe and well-tolerated, Leone says, cautioning
that "lots of things can go wrong" and that there may not be any benefit to
youngsters in the experiment.

   But it represents Jacob's only chance.

   "This is where our hope lies. There is nothing else," says Jacob's father,
Jeff Schwartz, 34. The couple has set up a foundation, called Jacob's Ladder,
dedicated to raising money for research into neurodegenerative disease.

   "If he does die," says Ellen Schwartz, "at least I'll know I did everything I
possibly could for him."

GRAPHIC: Star photo (TALOTTA) RARE DISEASE: Jeff and Ellen Schwartz with their
10-month-old son Jacob, who will be receiving experimental treatment at Yale
University School of Medicine for a rare brain condition called Canavan's
disease.

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 1999


                              47 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1998 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                    March 12, 1998, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. E3

LENGTH: 726 words

HEADLINE: Experimental procedure is final hope for Jacob Baby suffers from
extremely rare genetic disorder

BYLINE: BY LESLIE PAPP TORONTO STARCHILD GENETICS

BODY:


    Jacob Schwartz doesn't look like he's been stricken by a deadly illness.

   He's a giggling, chubby 9-month-old who loves hugs and funny noises. But
Jacob has a rare genetic disorder and he isn't likely to see his 10th birthday
unless experimental gene therapy can cure him.

   The Toronto boy is one of only 15 children in North America enrolled in a
cutting-edge study being done by scientists at Yale University School of
Medicine. Next month they're to inject a batch of artificially produced gene
material into his brain in the hope that this can replace a mutated gene he
inherited and which has left him with fatal Canavan's disease.

   "If this works, it could help cure many other neurological disorders, so it's
pretty important," says Jacob's mother, Ellen Schwartz, 30. "And, if we don't do
it, Jacob's just going to die. This is the only possible answer."

   Canavan's disease is extremely rare - so rare that Jacob is only the second
case seen at Toronto's Hospital for Sick Children in 10 years.

   It's caused by a mutant gene that prevents the formation of myelin, a fatty
substance that sheaths the body's nerves and acts much as insulation does around
an electric wire.

   Children affected by Canavan's have difficulty holding their heads up and can
never walk, talk, sit up, or play. Death usually occurs in the first 10 years of
life, with the patient's head becoming progressively enlarged as the brain
swells.

   Compared to what the future holds, Jacob remains in relatively good shape,
says Schwartz. "If you saw him on the street you'd never know he was sick; he's
very healthy looking, very cheerful."

   Despite his robust appearance, Jacob can't hold his head up, except for
moments at a time, and he can't see. His eyes function, but nerve damage, due to
lack of myelin, is blocking the visual messages being sent toward his brain, his
mother says. Jacob does, however, have extremely acute hearing and is quick to
laugh, especially at high-pitched, squeaky tones.

   "He has a great sense of humour," Schwartz says with a sigh. "He's
wonderful."

   Jacob's future rests with a study being conducted by neuroscientist Paola
Leone and fellow researchers at Yale. They injected four children in January
with a gene engineered to boost myelin production, and plan to treat four more
by the end of this month. Jacob's turn is expected to come in April.

   "We're trying to replace the defective gene by putting a healthy gene into
the brain cells of children with Canavan's," says Leone, adding it's too early
to see any results in the first children injected.

   Shortly before Jacob is taken to Yale, doctors at the Hospital for Sick
Children are to install in his head a shunt, or tube, that U.S. scientists will
use to send the gene material into the fluid of his brain. After the treatment,
specialists at Sick Kids are to monitor his progress with examinations and brain
wave measurements.

   "We hope to see an improvement after the injections," says Dr. Anne
Feigenbaum, of the hospital's genetics metabolic disease program. "That's what
we'll be documenting."

   If it works, the same method of injecting genetic material into the brain
could be applied to other neurodegenerative diseases, such as Alzheimer's,
Feigenbaum says. Because Canavan's involves a single gene mutation, affecting a
relatively simple enzyme, it's "a good candidate" for a trail-blazing study.

   Six times over the year following his injection, Jacob will be taken to
Philadelphia, where scientists will examine his progress with special scans.

   Biochemical changes should be evident within about three months, Leone says,
adding that improved myelin levels might be seen around eight months to a year.

   This is a "phase one" study, meaning its primary goal is to determine whether
the injected genetic material is safe and well-tolerated, Leone says, cautioning
that "lots of things can go wrong" and that there may not be any benefit to
youngsters in the experiment.

   But it represents Jacob's only chance.

   "This is where our hope lies. There is nothing else," says Jacob's father,
Jeff Schwartz, 34. The couple has set up a foundation, called Jacob's Ladder,
dedicated to raising money for research into neurodegenerative disease.

   "If he does die," says Ellen Schwartz, "at least I'll know I did everything I
possibly could for him."


GRAPHIC: Star photo (TALOTTA) RARE DISEASE: Jeff and Ellen Schwartz with their
10-month-old son Jacob, who will be receiving experimental treatment at Yale
University School of Medicine for a rare brain condition called Canavan's
disease.

LOAD-DATE: March 13, 1998


                              48 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1998 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                    February 13, 1998, Friday, METRO EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. F2

LENGTH: 356 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy showing promise in treatment of ovarian cancer

BYLINE: By Katherine Bouma SPECIAL TO THE STAR (ORLANDO SENTINEL)

DATELINE: ORLANDO, Fla.

BODY:

   ORLANDO, Fla. - Scientists might have one of the most effective weapons yet
in the fight against deadly ovarian cancer if a treatment presented this week in
Orlando succeeds in clinical tests.

   "My prediction is that we will be using this in addition to chemotherapy to
get a substantial increase in the success rate," says Dr. William Robinson, a
Tulane University researcher.

   So far the treatment has reduced ovarian cancer in laboratory mice and has
not shown any harmful effects to women. The next step is a broad study testing
its effectiveness against ovarian cancer in women.

   For the treatment, Tulane researchers attached part of an ovarian cancer gene
to a gene from the herpes virus. The result, a so-called "suicide gene," is
injected into the patient's abdomen. There, it seems to affect the other ovarian
cancer genes so that when a doctor treats the patient with a standard herpes
drug, the woman's immune system also attacks the cancer cells.

   Ovarian cancer is difficult to diagnose early. Doctors usually don't catch
the disease until it is in its final stages. At that point, the survival rate is
only 30 per cent. Doctors operate and remove the cancer, but it returns in most
patients.

   "Virtually all of them are going to die when the cancer recurs," says
Robinson, who presented his study to the Society of Gynecologic Oncologists.

   Doctors and cancer specialists are eager for anything they can add to
standard surgery and chemotherapy treatments to increase chances of survival.

   As part of their study, Robinson and his colleagues tested the injection on
18 women in the final stages of ovarian cancer. The only side effects seemed to
be a 24-hour fever in half the women and slight nausea in about a third of them.

   Although the cancers were too advanced to be expected to respond to the gene
therapy, cancer levels in four of the women improved and the disease completely
disappeared in another. That patient died two years later, however, after the
cancer returned.

   He hopes to begin a study to see if the vaccine can be used with standard
treatments to improve survival rates.

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 1999


                              49 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1998 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                    February 13, 1998, Friday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. F2

LENGTH: 352 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy showing promise in treatment of ovarian cancer

BYLINE: BY KATHERINE BOUMA SPECIAL TO THE STAR (ORLANDO SENTINEL)

DATELINE: ORLANDO, Fla.CANCER RESEARCH WOMEN

BODY:

   Scientists might have one of the most effective weapons yet in the fight
against deadly ovarian cancer if a treatment presented this week in Orlando
succeeds in clinical tests.

   "My prediction is that we will be using this in addition to chemotherapy to
get a substantial increase in the success rate," says Dr. William Robinson, a
Tulane University researcher.

   So far the treatment has reduced ovarian cancer in laboratory mice and has
not shown any harmful effects to women. The next step is a broad study testing
its effectiveness against ovarian cancer in women.

   For the treatment, Tulane researchers attached part of an ovarian cancer gene
to a gene from the herpes virus. The result, a so-called "suicide gene," is
injected into the patient's abdomen. There, it seems to affect the other ovarian
cancer genes so that when a doctor treats the patient with a standard herpes
drug, the woman's immune system also attacks the cancer cells.

   Ovarian cancer is difficult to diagnose early. Doctors usually don't catch
the disease until it is in its final stages. At that point, the survival rate is
only 30 per cent. Doctors operate and remove the cancer, but it returns in most
patients.

   "Virtually all of them are going to die when the cancer recurs," says
Robinson, who presented his study to the Society of Gynecologic Oncologists.

   Doctors and cancer specialists are eager for anything they can add to
standard surgery and chemotherapy treatments to increase chances of survival.

   As part of their study, Robinson and his colleagues tested the injection on
18 women in the final stages of ovarian cancer. The only side effects seemed to
be a 24-hour fever in half the women and slight nausea in about a third of them.

   Although the cancers were too advanced to be expected to respond to the gene
therapy, cancer levels in four of the women improved and the disease completely
disappeared in another. That patient died two years later, however, after the
cancer returned.

   He hopes to begin a study to see if the vaccine can be used with standard
treatments to improve survival rates.


LOAD-DATE: February 15, 1998


                              50 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1998 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                     January 2, 1998, Friday, METRO EDITION

SECTION: LIFE.health; Pg. E1

LENGTH: 358 words

HEADLINE: 'Good salt' REDUCING RISK OF STROKE

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   WASHINGTON - Fruits and vegetables contain "good salt" that may fight high
blood pressure and reduce the risk of stroke, according to researchers at the
University of California. In a recent study, they tested sodium chloride (table
salt), potassium chloride (marketed as "light" salt), and potassium bicarbonate
and potassium citrate (plant salts). Potassium salts not containing chloride
lowered the blood pressure of rats bred to develop the syndrome and lowered the
incidence of stroke in the animals. Potassium is found in high levels in fruits
and vegetables.

   Government warning CAPSULES CONTAMINATED

   OTTAWA - Health Canada is warning consumers not to use Sleeping Buddha
capsules. The herbal remedy has been found to be contaminated with the
prescription drugs flurazepam and estazolam. These drugs could pose a serious
risk to pregnant women, officials say. The product, manufactured in China and
imported by Treasure Box Products Inc., is being promoted for the treatment of
insomnia and restlessness.

   Heart bypasses GENE THERAPY BEING TESTED

   ORLANDO, Fla. - Scientists tinkering with gene therapy think they have found
a way to make hearts grow their own bypasses. The idea is to inject extra genes
directly into the heart that will trigger it to sprout new blood vessels within
two to three weeks. U.S. doctors have tested the idea on 20 patients with
severely clogged arteries in their legs. Of these, 16 grew new vessels that
carry blood around the blockages. Several have been spared the need for leg
amputations. Others have been freed of constant pain.

   Mediterranean diet ALBANIA MORTALITY RATES LOW

   LONDON - Mortality rates for Albanian adults are among the lowest in Europe,
despite the fact that they live in its poorest country and have limited access
to health services. Their Mediterranean diet - high in fruits, vegetables and
olive oil, and low in meat and milk products - is probably the reason, according
to researchers from the London School of Economics and University College
London. Albanian women live to an average of 74.2 years old and men to 67.8
years.

   FROM THE STAR'S NEWS SERVICES

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 1999


                              51 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1998 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                     January 2, 1998, Friday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE.HEALTH; Pg. E1

LENGTH: 355 words

HEADLINE: 'Good salt' REDUCING RISK OF STROKE

DATELINE: WASHINGTONBRIEFLY HEALTH DIGEST

BODY:

   Fruits and vegetables contain "good salt" that may fight high blood pressure
and reduce the risk of stroke, according to researchers at the University of
California. In a recent study, they tested sodium chloride (table salt),
potassium chloride (marketed as "light" salt), and potassium bicarbonate and
potassium citrate (plant salts). Potassium salts not containing chloride lowered
the blood pressure of rats bred to develop the syndrome and lowered the
incidence of stroke in the animals. Potassium is found in high levels in fruits
and vegetables.

   Government warning CAPSULES CONTAMINATED

   OTTAWA - Health Canada is warning consumers not to use Sleeping Buddha
capsules. The herbal remedy has been found to be contaminated with the
prescription drugs flurazepam and estazolam. These drugs could pose a serious
risk to pregnant women, officials say. The product, manufactured in China and
imported by Treasure Box Products Inc., is being promoted for the treatment of
insomnia and restlessness.

   Heart bypasses GENE THERAPY BEING TESTED

   ORLANDO, Fla. - Scientists tinkering with gene therapy think they have found
a way to make hearts grow their own bypasses. The idea is to inject extra genes
directly into the heart that will trigger it to sprout new blood vessels within
two to three weeks. U.S. doctors have tested the idea on 20 patients with
severely clogged arteries in their legs. Of these, 16 grew new vessels that
carry blood around the blockages. Several have been spared the need for leg
amputations. Others have been freed of constant pain.

   Mediterranean diet ALBANIA MORTALITY RATES LOW

   LONDON - Mortality rates for Albanian adults are among the lowest in Europe,
despite the fact that they live in its poorest country and have limited access
to health services. Their Mediterranean diet - high in fruits, vegetables and
olive oil, and low in meat and milk products - is probably the reason, according
to researchers from the London School of Economics and University College
London. Albanian women live to an average of 74.2 years old and men to 67.8
years.

   FROM THE STAR'S NEWS SERVICES


LOAD-DATE: January 23, 1998


                              52 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1997 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                   December 23, 1997, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A7

LENGTH: 523 words

HEADLINE: Using DNA may help fight CF Sick Kids scientists try to turn on
healthy cystic fibrosis gene

BYLINE: BY JOSEPH HALL TORONTO STAR

BODY:


    Scientists at Toronto's Hospital for Sick Children believe they may have
found a way to switch on healthy cystic fibrosis genes and help switch off the
deadly lung disease.

   Working at the hospital where the gene for the disease was discovered almost
a decade ago, Sick Kids researchers believe a new technique they're developing
may activate healthy replacement DNA material in the lungs and help reverse the
disorder.

   "The idea is to use other human DNA elements to control the expression of the
(replacement) cystic fibrosis genes," says molecular biologist Jim Hu, part of a
team involved in a gene therapy study published today in Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences.

   "We're using cystic fibrosis as a model system to work on lung gene therapy,"
Hu says. "If everything works out, we have a much wider application, not just
for cystic fibrosis but also for other lung related diseases such as lung
cancer."

   Previous attempts to replace defective cystic fibrosis genes with healthy
ones have proven fruitless.

   The problem, Hu says, is that earlier tries involved genetic material from
viruses to make the new DNA work. These virally influenced genes would not
activate themselves in the cells on the inner lining of the lungs, the place
where the degenerative disease takes its toll.

   "In a human body you have all kinds of cells, and in each cell, for certain
genes to be expressed, you have to have the proper DNA elements working," Hu
explains.

   "If you only have the gene itself, you cannot express it. You also need to
have proper control elements driving that expression."

   There are an estimated 100,000 genes spread intermittently throughout the
twisting DNA ladders that make up our normal 23 pairs of human chromosomes.

   All 100,000 of these genes are present in almost every cell in our bodies.
But only certain of these genes need to be expressed in any given organ - for
example, those that build and maintain the eyes or heart or lungs.

   Genetic control elements tell the genes when and where to activate.

   Hu's breakthrough, now entering the animal testing stage, was to attach a
control element - one unrelated to the cystic fibrosis gene - directly to the
gene itself, causing it to activate in lung tissue.

   "What we're trying to do is use the human DNA control elements that normally
control the gene cytokeratin 18 or K18," says Hu, who is also an assistant
pediatrics professor at the University of Toronto.

   "This K18 gene is normally expressed in most of the internal organs such as
the lungs and intestines, on their inner surface cells.

   "And it just happens that the cystic fibrosis gene also expresses in those
cells."

   Hu and his team have already activated their cystic fibrosis genes - known as
the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator or CFTR gene - in
laboratory tissue samples.

   The team will soon be testing on mice, with human trials four to five years
away.

   Hu says that the team's particular DNA control key may also activate genes
that combat lung cancer and other diseases that inhabit that organ's innermost
surface layer of cells.


LOAD-DATE: December 24, 1997


                              53 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1997 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                   December 23, 1997, Tuesday, METRO EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A7

LENGTH: 530 words

HEADLINE: Using DNA may help fight CF Sick Kids scientists try to turn on
healthy cystic fibrosis gene

BYLINE: By Joseph Hall Toronto Star

BODY:

   Scientists at Toronto's Hospital for Sick Children believe they may have
found a way to switch on healthy cystic fibrosis genes and help switch off the
deadly lung disease.

   Working at the hospital where the gene for the disease was discovered almost
a decade ago, Sick Kids researchers believe a new technique they're developing
may activate healthy replacement DNA material in the lungs and help reverse the
disorder.

   "The idea is to use other human DNA elements to control the expression of the
(replacement) cystic fibrosis genes," says molecular biologist Jim Hu, part of a
team involved in a gene therapy study published today in Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences.

   "We're using cystic fibrosis as a model system to work on lung gene therapy,"
Hu says. "If everything works out, we have a much wider application, not just
for cystic fibrosis but also for other lung related diseases such as lung
cancer."

   Previous attempts to replace defective cystic fibrosis genes with healthy
ones have proven fruitless.

   The problem, Hu says, is that earlier tries involved genetic material from
viruses to make the new DNA work. These virally influenced genes would not
activate themselves in the cells on the inner lining of the lungs, the place
where the degenerative disease takes its toll.

   "In a human body you have all kinds of cells, and in each cell, for certain
genes to be expressed, you have to have the proper DNA elements working," Hu
explains.

   "If you only have the gene itself, you cannot express it. You also need to
have proper control elements driving that expression."

   There are an estimated 100,000 genes spread intermittently throughout the
twisting DNA ladders that make up our normal 23 pairs of human chromosomes.

   All 100,000 of these genes are present in almost every cell in our bodies.
But only certain of these genes need to be expressed in any given organ - for
example, those that build and maintain the eyes or heart or lungs.

   Genetic control elements tell the genes when and where to activate.

   Hu's breakthrough, now entering the animal testing stage, was to attach a
control element - one unrelated to the cystic fibrosis gene - directly to the
gene itself, causing it to activate in lung tissue.

   "What we're trying to do is use the human DNA control elements that normally
control the gene cytokeratin 18 or K18," says Hu, who is also an assistant
pediatrics professor at the University of Toronto.

   "This K18 gene is normally expressed in most of the internal organs such as
the lungs and intestines, on their inner surface cells.

   "And it just happens that the cystic fibrosis gene also expresses in those
cells."

   Hu and his team have already activated their cystic fibrosis genes - known as
the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator or CFTR gene - in
laboratory tissue samples.

   The team will soon be testing on mice, with human trials four to five years
away.

   Hu says that the team's particular DNA control key may also activate genes
that combat lung cancer and other diseases that inhabit that organ's innermost
surface layer of cells.Toronto; hospital; genetics; research

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 1999


                              54 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1997 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                    December 19, 1997, Friday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE.HEALTH; Pg. G3

LENGTH: 606 words

HEADLINE: Leg artery therapies may be step forward

BYLINE: BY MARILYN DUNLOP

BODY:


    Researchers in the United States and France have discovered two new
therapies that may help people who find walking painful because of narrowed leg
arteries.

   In Boston, scientists are using gene therapy to spur the growth of new blood
vessels in the leg to provide better blood circulation, according to a report in
the Medical Post.

   Doctors at Tufts University treated nine patients - six of whom were facing
amputation - after conventional treatments hadn't worked.

   The doctors injected a growth factor gene obtained from human pituitary
tumours, which produce the factor to provide themselves with a blood supply.
Patients received two injections in their leg muscles.

   Two to six months later, angiograms revealed new blood vessels had formed in
seven of the treated legs, and blood flow improved in eight.

   "It's one of the mysteries of biology that once these blood vessels develop,
they somehow have the ability to form the appropriate connections with existing
blood vessels so they're useful for augmenting blood flow in the legs," says Dr.
Jeffrey Isner, a professor of medicine and pathololgy at Tufts and one of the
researchers.

   Conventionally, doctors use a vein from the patient to create a bypass around
a clogged section of artery in the leg. But often, the bypass itself becomes
clogged.

   But a study, conducted by a European team led by Dr. Jean-Pierre Becquemin,
has found that giving patients ticlopidine tablets once a day following bypass
surgery helped keep the bypass open. Ticlopidine interferes with the
blood-clotting process.

   The team reported in The New England Journal of Medicine that after two
years, 66.4 per cent of the patients given ticlopidine still had open bypass
grafts compared with 51.2 per cent of those who received a placebo.

   CANCER SPREAD: One reason cancer cells are able to spread from the site of a
primary tumour to other body organs has been discovered by researchers at the
Weizmann Institute of Science in Rehovot, Israel.

   They have shown that a gene, commonly called the cell suicide gene, can
prevent what is known as metastasis, but if the gene is lost or flawed, cancer
can spread.

   In a news release, professor Adi Kimchi, who led the team of researchers
says, "In our experiment (performed in mice), we have shown that introducing a
good copy of the gene into metastatic cells restores the ability of these cells
to follow the order to kill themselves."

   Cell death is essential for the proper renewal and turnover of tissues, the
report explains. But, it adds, when cells refuse to die because the suicide gene
is lacking, the result can be unwanted cell proliferation and development of
cancer tumours. The team reported their finding in the journal Nature.

   BOWEL MOVEMENT: Doctors in Toronto, Calgary and Vancouver are taking part in
a North American study assessing the effectiveness of implanted artificial
sphincters in people unable to control their bowels.

   Artificial sphincters may represent a major breakthrough for patients for
whom the alternative is a colostomy, says Dr. John Heine, of the University of
Calgary. A colostomy is an operation that diverts waste material into a storage
bag outside the body.

   He says in the Medical Post that the procedure involves implanting an
inflatable ring around the patient's anus. The ring is linked by a tube to an
implanted pump in the groin. The ring is filled with fluid that closes the anus
like normal sphincter muscles. When the patient is ready for a bowel movement,
he or she activates the pump so it drains the fluid out of the ring, allowing
the patient to empty their bowel.


LOAD-DATE: December 20, 1997


                              55 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1997 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                    December 19, 1997, Friday, METRO EDITION

SECTION: LIFE.health; Pg. G3

LENGTH: 611 words

HEADLINE: Leg artery therapies may be step forward

BYLINE: By Marilyn Dunlop

BODY:

   Researchers in the United States and France have discovered two new therapies
that may help people who find walking painful because of narrowed leg arteries.

   In Boston, scientists are using gene therapy to spur the growth of new blood
vessels in the leg to provide better blood circulation, according to a report in
the Medical Post.

   Doctors at Tufts University treated nine patients - six of whom were facing
amputation - after conventional treatments hadn't worked.

   The doctors injected a growth factor gene obtained from human pituitary
tumours, which produce the factor to provide themselves with a blood supply.
Patients received two injections in their leg muscles.

   Two to six months later, angiograms revealed new blood vessels had formed in
seven of the treated legs, and blood flow improved in eight.

   "It's one of the mysteries of biology that once these blood vessels develop,
they somehow have the ability to form the appropriate connections with existing
blood vessels so they're useful for augmenting blood flow in the legs," says Dr.
Jeffrey Isner, a professor of medicine and pathololgy at Tufts and one of the
researchers.

   Conventionally, doctors use a vein from the patient to create a bypass around
a clogged section of artery in the leg. But often, the bypass itself becomes
clogged.

   But a study, conducted by a European team led by Dr. Jean-Pierre Becquemin,
has found that giving patients ticlopidine tablets once a day following bypass
surgery helped keep the bypass open. Ticlopidine interferes with the
blood-clotting process.

   The team reported in The New England Journal of Medicine that after two
years, 66.4 per cent of the patients given ticlopidine still had open bypass
grafts compared with 51.2 per cent of those who received a placebo.

   CANCER SPREAD: One reason cancer cells are able to spread from the site of a
primary tumour to other body organs has been discovered by researchers at the
Weizmann Institute of Science in Rehovot, Israel.

   They have shown that a gene, commonly called the cell suicide gene, can
prevent what is known as metastasis, but if the gene is lost or flawed, cancer
can spread.

   In a news release, professor Adi Kimchi, who led the team of researchers
says, "In our experiment (performed in mice), we have shown that introducing a
good copy of the gene into metastatic cells restores the ability of these cells
to follow the order to kill themselves."

   Cell death is essential for the proper renewal and turnover of tissues, the
report explains. But, it adds, when cells refuse to die because the suicide gene
is lacking, the result can be unwanted cell proliferation and development of
cancer tumours. The team reported their finding in the journal Nature.

   BOWEL MOVEMENT: Doctors in Toronto, Calgary and Vancouver are taking part in
a North American study assessing the effectiveness of implanted artificial
sphincters in people unable to control their bowels.

   Artificial sphincters may represent a major breakthrough for patients for
whom the alternative is a colostomy, says Dr. John Heine, of the University of
Calgary. A colostomy is an operation that diverts waste material into a storage
bag outside the body.

   He says in the Medical Post that the procedure involves implanting an
inflatable ring around the patient's anus. The ring is linked by a tube to an
implanted pump in the groin. The ring is filled with fluid that closes the anus
like normal sphincter muscles. When the patient is ready for a bowel movement,
he or she activates the pump so it drains the fluid out of the ring, allowing
the patient to empty their bowel.New; in; Medicine; digest

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 1999


                              56 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1997 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                    December 9, 1997, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. E1

LENGTH: 647 words

HEADLINE: Academia joins world of one-liners

BYLINE: BY JIM DOYLE TORONTO STAR

BODY:


    I WAS RIDING the subway the other day and have come to the conclusion the
final triumph of Seinfeld World has been achieved. Everybody is doing comedy
these days. And everything is glib, flip, insouciant and self- absorbed. Even, I
am afraid, the University of Western Ontario.

   Western, subway commuters will by now know, has launched an advertising
campaign aimed at bumping enrolment. It's apparently running only in Toronto and
consists of testimonials from various Western students about the assorted
appeals of the London, Ont., school. On posters, UWO students provide pithy
replies to little headlined prompts. And there isn't one among them who
couldn't, by the look of things, stroll directly on to the stage at The Riv or
start spinning a humour column for the back page of The New Yorker.

   Even the campaign's biology major is a media savvy, world-weary hoot. Asked
to cite her nightmare, Danielle Marentette reports: "Human genetic engineering.
Or being forced to watch the line-dancing channel."

   It's funny she should refer to television. Personally, I blame TV for all
this, for the fact everyone on the planet can now speak in pointed clips. I also
blame E-mail. I mean, have you ever received a sociable one that didn't take a
wry turn? In the world of the one-screen letter, the killer one-liner is king.

   Of course, I'm bitter. On campus, witty word play used to be the preserve of
artsies. (It does still grow there. When Western English major Marya Maat was
asked her First Loves, she said: The Cat In The Hat, The Velveteen Rabbit, Dick,
Jane, Spot. Asked her Most Treasured Tool of the Trade, she replies:
Alliteration.) But now everybody's at it. Even the engineers.

   When I was at school, engineers used to drink beer, do one-armed push-ups and
vomit on their shirts, while more sensitive types made off with their
girlfriends by quoting Yeats. Scientists were seldom seen, much less heard from.
But at Western, the ads shows us, there's a biochemist who says his master plan
is to develop "gene therapies that will cure cystic fibrosis. Or create cold
fusion in a coffee cup."

   I don't think Yeats will cut it anymore.

   As I recall, Western used to be a perfectly respectable seat of higher
learning, a sort of country club where the well-off could dispatch offspring
unable to get into Queen's. Now, Western runs ads saying Major in Yourself.
Which, of course, is the perfect hook in the Seinfeld age of cynical, neurotic
self-absorption.

   Take Western student Jonas Pennell, enrolled in Media, Information and
Technoculture. (Hasn't this kid been listening to the Premier? He'll never work
a day in this province taking courses like that.) Pennell's purpose in life, his
poster says, is to "challenge Gatesesque empires." Good so far. But under his
Pet Peeve, is this: "Slow downloads on the Miles Davis Website and the recent
anti-goatee movement."

   Why it's perfect. Absolutely perfect. It's totally cool.

   In fact, it's so hip, so insufferably precious, so dressed-in-black, neo-
Goth, Queen-Street-east-of-Bathurst, such a borrowed cultural reference, you'd
swear it was dreamed up by a team of advertising copywriters after three weeks
of 20-something focus groups.

   Wait. You don't think that's it?

   You don't think this kid is passing off some ad man's bon mots as his own? Or
that Western, in the name of higher enrolment and filthy lucre, is countenancing
this?

   We had a name for that when I went to school. It started with p, ended in ism
and could get you expelled.

   But, hey, wait again!

   I just looked down the subway car. This Jonas Pennell kid looks exactly like
the pale, scrawny, goateed guy in the ad for the Hilfiger shirt . . . and the
Club Monaco pants . . . and the Calvin Klein skivvies.

   I'm not sure there even is a Jonas Pennell.

   Jim Coyle's column appears Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday.



LOAD-DATE: December 10, 1997


                              57 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1997 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                    December 9, 1997, Tuesday, METRO EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. E1

LENGTH: 646 words

HEADLINE: Academia joins world of one-liners

BYLINE: By Jim Doyle TORONTO STAR

BODY:

   I WAS RIDING the subway the other day and have come to the conclusion the
final triumph of Seinfeld World has been achieved. Everybody is doing comedy
these days. And everything is glib, flip, insouciant and self- absorbed. Even, I
am afraid, the University of Western Ontario.

   Western, subway commuters will by now know, has launched an advertising
campaign aimed at bumping enrolment. It's apparently running only in Toronto and
consists of testimonials from various Western students about the assorted
appeals of the London, Ont., school. On posters, UWO students provide pithy
replies to little headlined prompts. And there isn't one among them who
couldn't, by the look of things, stroll directly on to the stage at The Riv or
start spinning a humour column for the back page of The New Yorker.

   Even the campaign's biology major is a media savvy, world-weary hoot. Asked
to cite her nightmare, Danielle Marentette reports: "Human genetic engineering.
Or being forced to watch the line-dancing channel."

   It's funny she should refer to television. Personally, I blame TV for all
this, for the fact everyone on the planet can now speak in pointed clips. I also
blame E-mail. I mean, have you ever received a sociable one that didn't take a
wry turn? In the world of the one-screen letter, the killer one-liner is king.

   Of course, I'm bitter. On campus, witty word play used to be the preserve of
artsies. (It does still grow there. When Western English major Marya Maat was
asked her First Loves, she said: The Cat In The Hat, The Velveteen Rabbit, Dick,
Jane, Spot. Asked her Most Treasured Tool of the Trade, she replies:
Alliteration.) But now everybody's at it. Even the engineers.

   When I was at school, engineers used to drink beer, do one-armed push-ups and
vomit on their shirts, while more sensitive types made off with their
girlfriends by quoting Yeats. Scientists were seldom seen, much less heard from.
But at Western, the ads shows us, there's a biochemist who says his master plan
is to develop "gene therapies that will cure cystic fibrosis. Or create cold
fusion in a coffee cup."

   I don't think Yeats will cut it anymore.

   As I recall, Western used to be a perfectly respectable seat of higher
learning, a sort of country club where the well-off could dispatch offspring
unable to get into Queen's. Now, Western runs ads saying Major in Yourself.
Which, of course, is the perfect hook in the Seinfeld age of cynical, neurotic
self-absorption.

   Take Western student Jonas Pennell, enrolled in Media, Information and
Technoculture. (Hasn't this kid been listening to the Premier? He'll never work
a day in this province taking courses like that.) Pennell's purpose in life, his
poster says, is to "challenge Gatesesque empires." Good so far. But under his
Pet Peeve, is this: "Slow downloads on the Miles Davis Website and the recent
anti-goatee movement."

   Why it's perfect. Absolutely perfect. It's totally cool.

   In fact, it's so hip, so insufferably precious, so dressed-in-black, neo-
Goth, Queen-Street-east-of-Bathurst, such a borrowed cultural reference, you'd
swear it was dreamed up by a team of advertising copywriters after three weeks
of 20-something focus groups.

   Wait. You don't think that's it?

   You don't think this kid is passing off some ad man's bon mots as his own? Or
that Western, in the name of higher enrolment and filthy lucre, is countenancing
this?

   We had a name for that when I went to school. It started with p, ended in ism
and could get you expelled.

   But, hey, wait again!

   I just looked down the subway car. This Jonas Pennell kid looks exactly like
the pale, scrawny, goateed guy in the ad for the Hilfiger shirt . . . and the
Club Monaco pants . . . and the Calvin Klein skivvies.

   I'm not sure there even is a Jonas Pennell.

   Jim Coyle's column appears Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday.

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 1999


                              58 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1997 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                   November 27, 1997, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A28

LENGTH: 463 words

HEADLINE: Parents' special gift remembers valiant son

BYLINE: BY DEBRA BLACK TORONTO STAR

BODY:


    For Bob and Carol Petter, this Christmas is all about remembering their son
Craig, 22, who died of cancer last January.

   They've created memory books for their other children, Scott, 29, and Tanya,
28, that are full of pictures and stories about Craig, a former commerce student
at Queen's University.

   Most importantly for these devoted parents, they've sent a special donation
of $ 500 in Craig's memory to The Star Santa Claus Fund.

   It was something Craig would have wanted, says Carol Petter, a provincial
government employee.

   Last December, Craig, who knew he was losing his battle with melanoma,
voraciously read the stories of children who were helped by the Santa Claus
fund. He was incredibly moved by their courage, his mother says.

   As Christmas approached, the Petters tried to think of something appropriate
to give Craig as a gift. Knowing it would likely be his last Christmas, they
just couldn't come up with anything.

   Then Craig and his parents talked about continuing his memory in a Christmas
celebration of some kind. The three of them came up with the idea of donating to
The Star Santa Claus Fund.

   "We had discussed it with him," says Carol, who lives with her husband in
Trenton. "We thought it would be a nice way to give to others through him. He
thought it was a neat idea.

   "He was a very giving person. He was the type of person who would read the
stories and really feel for the families."

   Craig fought cancer for two years, undergoing surgery, chemotherapy and
experimental gene therapy, says Bob Petter, a retired teacher.

   All the while, he continued to attend university and participate in school
life, including being captain of the varsity golf team.

   He was a model of courage and strength to his friends and family, says his
mother.

   Now, thanks to that courage and strength and the generosity of families like
the Petters, 35,000 needy children across Metro will have something special
under their tree this Christmas.

   Santa Fund organizers hope to raise $ 1 million to cover the cost of gift
boxes for the children, aged 12 and under. The boxes include a hat, mitts, a toy
and some sweets.

   During the postal strike you can drop off your cheques for the fund at the
security desk in The Star building, One Yonge St., the Vaughan Press Centre or
The Star's zone circulation offices.

   Make your cheque or money order payable to The Santa Claus Fund. You can also
make a donation by VISA. To do so, call (416) 869-4872.

   Because The Star pays all administration costs, every dollar donated goes
directly to paying for the gift boxes.

   Donors will receive a tax receipt and be listed in The Star unless they ask
to remain anonymous. The Star does not authorize anyone to solicit for donations
on its behalf.


LOAD-DATE: November 28, 1997


                              59 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1997 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                   November 27, 1997, Thursday, METRO EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A28

LENGTH: 469 words

HEADLINE: Parents' special gift remembers valiant son

BYLINE: By Debra Black Toronto Star

BODY:

   For Bob and Carol Petter, this Christmas is all about remembering their son
Craig, 22, who died of cancer last January.

   They've created memory books for their other children, Scott, 29, and Tanya,
28, that are full of pictures and stories about Craig, a former commerce student
at Queen's University.

   Most importantly for these devoted parents, they've sent a special donation
of $500 in Craig's memory to The Star Santa Claus Fund.

   It was something Craig would have wanted, says Carol Petter, a provincial
government employee.

   Last December, Craig, who knew he was losing his battle with melanoma,
voraciously read the stories of children who were helped by the Santa Claus
fund. He was incredibly moved by their courage, his mother says.

   As Christmas approached, the Petters tried to think of something appropriate
to give Craig as a gift. Knowing it would likely be his last Christmas, they
just couldn't come up with anything.

   Then Craig and his parents talked about continuing his memory in a Christmas
celebration of some kind. The three of them came up with the idea of donating to
The Star Santa Claus Fund.

   "We had discussed it with him," says Carol, who lives with her husband in
Trenton. "We thought it would be a nice way to give to others through him. He
thought it was a neat idea.

   "He was a very giving person. He was the type of person who would read the
stories and really feel for the families."

   Craig fought cancer for two years, undergoing surgery, chemotherapy and
experimental gene therapy, says Bob Petter, a retired teacher.

   All the while, he continued to attend university and participate in school
life, including being captain of the varsity golf team.

   He was a model of courage and strength to his friends and family, says his
mother.

   Now, thanks to that courage and strength and the generosity of families like
the Petters, 35,000 needy children across Metro will have something special
under their tree this Christmas.

   Santa Fund organizers hope to raise $1 million to cover the cost of gift
boxes for the children, aged 12 and under. The boxes include a hat, mitts, a toy
and some sweets.

   During the postal strike you can drop off your cheques for the fund at the
security desk in The Star building, One Yonge St., the Vaughan Press Centre or
The Star's zone circulation offices.

   Make your cheque or money order payable to The Santa Claus Fund. You can also
make a donation by VISA. To do so, call (416) 869-4872.

   Because The Star pays all administration costs, every dollar donated goes
directly to paying for the gift boxes.

   Donors will receive a tax receipt and be listed in The Star unless they ask
to remain anonymous. The Star does not authorize anyone to solicit for donations
on its behalf.Star; Santa; Claus; Fund

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 1999


                              60 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1997 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                  November 26, 1997, Wednesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A30

LENGTH: 287 words

HEADLINE: Breakthrough pumps insulin out with saliva

BYLINE: REUTERS)

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   California researchers have used genetic engineering to turn ordinary saliva
glands into insulin pumps, and said yesterday their method had successfully
treated diabetes in rats.

   The researchers hope their novel approach to gene therapy could transform the
way diseases from diabetes to dwarfism and even some forms of cancer are
treated.

   "We think it's got a lot of promise," said Dr. Ira Goldfine of the University
of California-San Francisco.

   Goldfine's team inserted genes into the salivary glands of rats to make them
produce insulin and secrete it in the saliva. They did the same trick with
growth hormone.

   Insulin helps the body regulate blood sugar levels and diabetics either
produce too little or none at all, or their bodies resist its effects. Sometimes
beta cells in the pancreas that should produce insulin don't work.

   "In both types of diabetes, if you had more insulin you wouldn't have
diabetes, but there's no way we know of to get beta cells to re-generate or to
produce more in the long term," Goldfine said. "We decided to . . . get another
kind of cell to do the job."

   The researchers targeted exocrine cells, which line the salivary glands and
pancreas and normally secrete digestive enzymes, and changed them to secrete
insulin and growth hormone.

   Diabetic rats received human insulin and it "totally normalized the blood
glucose," Goldfine said. "It was better than we thought it would be."

   Goldfine said the approach, published in the journal Nature Medicine
yesterday, could work for a range of diseases.

   "We could essentially put any protein into these glands so, for instance, if
you needed clotting factor we could put clotting factor for hemophiliacs," he
said.


LOAD-DATE: November 27, 1997


                              61 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1997 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                  November 26, 1997, Wednesday, METRO EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A30

LENGTH: 297 words

HEADLINE: Breakthrough pumps insulin out with saliva

BYLINE: (Reuters)

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   WASHINGTON (Reuters) - California researchers have used genetic engineering
to turn ordinary saliva glands into insulin pumps, and said yesterday their
method had successfully treated diabetes in rats.

   The researchers hope their novel approach to gene therapy could transform the
way diseases from diabetes to dwarfism and even some forms of cancer are
treated.

   "We think it's got a lot of promise," said Dr. Ira Goldfine of the University
of California-San Francisco.

   Goldfine's team inserted genes into the salivary glands of rats to make them
produce insulin and secrete it in the saliva. They did the same trick with
growth hormone.

   Insulin helps the body regulate blood sugar levels and diabetics either
produce too little or none at all, or their bodies resist its effects. Sometimes
beta cells in the pancreas that should produce insulin don't work.

   "In both types of diabetes, if you had more insulin you wouldn't have
diabetes, but there's no way we know of to get beta cells to re-generate or to
produce more in the long term," Goldfine said. "We decided to . . . get another
kind of cell to do the job."

   The researchers targeted exocrine cells, which line the salivary glands and
pancreas and normally secrete digestive enzymes, and changed them to secrete
insulin and growth hormone.

   Diabetic rats received human insulin and it "totally normalized the blood
glucose," Goldfine said. "It was better than we thought it would be."

   Goldfine said the approach, published in the journal Nature Medicine
yesterday, could work for a range of diseases.

   "We could essentially put any protein into these glands so, for instance, if
you needed clotting factor we could put clotting factor for hemophiliacs," he
said.health; research; genetics

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 1999


                              62 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1997 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                    November 14, 1997, Friday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE.HEALTH; Pg. B2

LENGTH: 650 words

HEADLINE: Balloon treatment may halt uterine bleeding

BYLINE: BY MARILYN DUNLOP

BODY:


    A procedure with a water-filled balloon can stop abnormal uterine bleeding
in women taking hormone replacement therapy when such bleeding cannot be
controlled by changing doses of the hormones, according to a Montreal
gynecologist.

   "It's easy, it's quick and so far it looks very promising," Dr. Claude
Fortin, assistant professor of medicine at McGill University, told a meeting of
the International Congress of Gynecologic Endoscopy.

   A balloon is inserted into the patient's uterus. It is inflated with hot
water, which coagulates blood vessels in the uterine lining. Eight minutes
later, the treatment is complete.

   Most women who experience abnormal bleeding with hormone replacement therapy
only need a change of dosage, according to a report in The Medical Post. But for
a small percentage of patients, the bleeding does not stop. They are required to
end the hormone therapy. However, Fortin says, some of these patients need to
continue the therapy because they are at high risk of osteoporosis, heart
disease or severe, long-lasting menopausal symptoms.

   Fortin has performed the procedure on 21 women, aged 42 to 62. Some 85 per
cent reported improvement and 60 per cent had no further bleeding. Some of the
women have had no bleeding for more than a year after the balloon treatment.

   CANCER SCREENING: Regular screening of women with increased risk of breast
cancer, including those under age 50, can mean earlier detection of the disease,
a study shows.

   More than 1,000 women with factors, such as family history, that increase the
possibility of developing breast cancer were part of the study. It was conducted
over six years at Toronto-Sunnybrook Regional Cancer Centre at Sunnybrook Health
Sciences Centre.

   The study confirmed that the criteria used to determine high, moderate and
slightly increased risk are valid and warrant regular checkups, including a
combination of mammography, self-breast examination and breast examination by a
health clinician.

   Dr. Pamela Chart, director of the preventive oncology program at the centre,
reports the study in the Journal Of The Canadian Medical Association.

   Among those studied, 986 were found to have an increased risk. Of the 381
categorized as being at high risk, 12 developed breast cancer, as did four of
204 women considered to have moderate risk and eight of 401 found to have a
slightly increased risk. Of these 24 cancer patients, 17 reported a family
history of breast cancer.

   GENE THERAPY: Researchers at the University of Toronto are using a jellyfish
gene to help them deliver other genes into cells as a method of treatment.

   Dr. Robert Hawley, scientific director of the cancer gene therapy program at
Toronto Hospital, says the jellyfish gene provides a way of seeing exactly where
the gene they want to insert is going because it is naturally fluorescent. The
jellyfish gene is inserted into certain safe viruses that are used as carriers,
to take genes into cells so they can become part of the genetic material of the
cell.

   Many diseases result from a missing or flawed gene. Giving cells a normal
copy of that gene, called gene therapy, is under intense study in research
centres around the world, according to the Medical Post.

   CLOGGED VESSELS: Damaged blood vessels narrow and can become clogged as a
result of an accumulation of fatty substances, proliferation of smooth muscle
cells, and inflammation and blood clots at the site of the wound.

   A New York researcher, Dr. Joseph DeRose of Columbia University College of
Physicians and Surgeons, is testing a drug, commonly used to treat psoriasis and
acne, as a way to stop this narrowing.

   The drug, retinoic acid, stops smooth muscles from proliferating and reduces
inflammation, according to a news release from the American College of Surgeons.

   Blood vessels can be damaged as a result of smoking and high blood pressure.


LOAD-DATE: November 15, 1997


                              63 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1997 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                    November 14, 1997, Friday, METRO EDITION

SECTION: LIFE.HEALTH; Pg. B2

LENGTH: 654 words

HEADLINE: Balloon treatment may halt uterine bleeding

BYLINE: By Marilyn Dunlop

BODY:

   A procedure with a water-filled balloon can stop abnormal uterine bleeding in
women taking hormone replacement therapy when such bleeding cannot be controlled
by changing doses of the hormones, according to a Montreal gynecologist.

   "It's easy, it's quick and so far it looks very promising," Dr. Claude
Fortin, assistant professor of medicine at McGill University, told a meeting of
the International Congress of Gynecologic Endoscopy.

   A balloon is inserted into the patient's uterus. It is inflated with hot
water, which coagulates blood vessels in the uterine lining. Eight minutes
later, the treatment is complete.

   Most women who experience abnormal bleeding with hormone replacement therapy
only need a change of dosage, according to a report in The Medical Post. But for
a small percentage of patients, the bleeding does not stop. They are required to
end the hormone therapy. However, Fortin says, some of these patients need to
continue the therapy because they are at high risk of osteoporosis, heart
disease or severe, long-lasting menopausal symptoms.

   Fortin has performed the procedure on 21 women, aged 42 to 62. Some 85 per
cent reported improvement and 60 per cent had no further bleeding. Some of the
women have had no bleeding for more than a year after the balloon treatment.

   CANCER SCREENING: Regular screening of women with increased risk of breast
cancer, including those under age 50, can mean earlier detection of the disease,
a study shows.

   More than 1,000 women with factors, such as family history, that increase the
possibility of developing breast cancer were part of the study. It was conducted
over six years at Toronto-Sunnybrook Regional Cancer Centre at Sunnybrook Health
Sciences Centre.

   The study confirmed that the criteria used to determine high, moderate and
slightly increased risk are valid and warrant regular checkups, including a
combination of mammography, self-breast examination and breast examination by a
health clinician.

   Dr. Pamela Chart, director of the preventive oncology program at the centre,
reports the study in the Journal Of The Canadian Medical Association.

   Among those studied, 986 were found to have an increased risk. Of the 381
categorized as being at high risk, 12 developed breast cancer, as did four of
204 women considered to have moderate risk and eight of 401 found to have a
slightly increased risk. Of these 24 cancer patients, 17 reported a family
history of breast cancer.

   GENE THERAPY: Researchers at the University of Toronto are using a jellyfish
gene to help them deliver other genes into cells as a method of treatment.

   Dr. Robert Hawley, scientific director of the cancer gene therapy program at
Toronto Hospital, says the jellyfish gene provides a way of seeing exactly where
the gene they want to insert is going because it is naturally fluorescent. The
jellyfish gene is inserted into certain safe viruses that are used as carriers,
to take genes into cells so they can become part of the genetic material of the
cell.

   Many diseases result from a missing or flawed gene. Giving cells a normal
copy of that gene, called gene therapy, is under intense study in research
centres around the world, according to the Medical Post.

   CLOGGED VESSELS: Damaged blood vessels narrow and can become clogged as a
result of an accumulation of fatty substances, proliferation of smooth muscle
cells, and inflammation and blood clots at the site of the wound.

   A New York researcher, Dr. Joseph DeRose of Columbia University College of
Physicians and Surgeons, is testing a drug, commonly used to treat psoriasis and
acne, as a way to stop this narrowing.

   The drug, retinoic acid, stops smooth muscles from proliferating and reduces
inflammation, according to a news release from the American College of Surgeons.

   Blood vessels can be damaged as a result of smoking and high blood
pressure.New; in; Medicine

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 1999


                              64 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1997 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                    November 10, 1997, Monday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A2

LENGTH: 408 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy called a success First time it has ever worked,
researchers say

BYLINE: REUTERS)

DATELINE: ORLANDO, Fla.

BODY:

   Researchers said yesterday they had used gene therapy to grow new blood
vessels in the legs of people with blocked arteries and said it was the first
time the therapy had worked successfully in humans.

   They injected DNA instructing the body to grow the new blood vessels into 10
people and were delighted to find most of the patients did indeed grow new
arteries.

   "This is the first time that gene therapy has been proven to work," Dr.
Jeffrey Isner of St. Elizabeth Medical Centre and Tufts University School of
Medicine in Boston, who worked on the study, said.

   "In all the previous 200 attempts at genetic engineering, it has never been
shown to have any lasting effect on the body and many people thought genetic
engineering was just pie in the sky," he said. "We have answered that."

   Isner, who presented his findings to the American Heart Association's annual
scientific sessions, said the eight volunteers who showed improvement all had
arteries in their legs blocked by atherosclerosis - the same plaque that causes
coronary artery disease.

   Doctors knew that some people with blockages spontaneously grew new arteries
in their legs that bypassed the clogged arteries. Tumour cells also produce a
substance, known as a growth factor, that causes this process and scientists had
identified the gene responsible.

   Isner's team injected the gene for this factor into 10 volunteers who had
failed all other attempts at therapy for their disease. Blood flow improved in
eight and the new arteries could be seen in seven.

   "Since this gene therapy works in the leg, it should work in the heart,"
Isner said. His findings about one patient were published in the Lancet medical
journal in 1996.

   He said it may help patients who now undergo balloon angioplasty for their
heart disease. Balloon angioplasty involves inserting a catheter into clogged
arteries and gently dilating them with a tiny balloon.

   Isner's findings are still highly experimental. The volunteers approved for
gene therapy are usually very sick and have failed to improve with standard
medicines or therapies.

   Only 10 people were in the study and there was no comparison group that did
not get the genes - to make sure that something other than the genes was not
causing the effect.

   Nonetheless, Isner said he thought it showed promise. His team used "naked"
DNA, as opposed to another gene therapy approach that incorporates the gene into
a virus.


LOAD-DATE: November 11, 1997


                              65 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1997 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                    November 10, 1997, Monday, METRO EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A2

LENGTH: 421 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy called a success First time it has ever worked,
researchers say

BYLINE: (Reuters)

DATELINE: ORLANDO, Fla.

BODY:

   ORLANDO, Fla. (Reuters) - Researchers said yesterday they had used gene
therapy to grow new blood vessels in the legs of people with blocked arteries
and said it was the first time the therapy had worked successfully in humans.

   They injected DNA instructing the body to grow the new blood vessels into 10
people and were delighted to find most of the patients did indeed grow new
arteries.

   "This is the first time that gene therapy has been proven to work," Dr.
Jeffrey Isner of St. Elizabeth Medical Centre and Tufts University School of
Medicine in Boston, who worked on the study, said.

   "In all the previous 200 attempts at genetic engineering, it has never been
shown to have any lasting effect on the body and many people thought genetic
engineering was just pie in the sky," he said. "We have answered that."

   Isner, who presented his findings to the American Heart Association's annual
scientific sessions, said the eight volunteers who showed improvement all had
arteries in their legs blocked by atherosclerosis - the same plaque that causes
coronary artery disease.

   Doctors knew that some people with blockages spontaneously grew new arteries
in their legs that bypassed the clogged arteries. Tumour cells also produce a
substance, known as a growth factor, that causes this process and scientists had
identified the gene responsible.

   Isner's team injected the gene for this factor into 10 volunteers who had
failed all other attempts at therapy for their disease. Blood flow improved in
eight and the new arteries could be seen in seven.

   "Since this gene therapy works in the leg, it should work in the heart,"
Isner said. His findings about one patient were published in the Lancet medical
journal in 1996.

   He said it may help patients who now undergo balloon angioplasty for their
heart disease. Balloon angioplasty involves inserting a catheter into clogged
arteries and gently dilating them with a tiny balloon.

   Isner's findings are still highly experimental. The volunteers approved for
gene therapy are usually very sick and have failed to improve with standard
medicines or therapies.

   Only 10 people were in the study and there was no comparison group that did
not get the genes - to make sure that something other than the genes was not
causing the effect.

   Nonetheless, Isner said he thought it showed promise. His team used "naked"
DNA, as opposed to another gene therapy approach that incorporates the gene into
a virus.United; States; genetics; health; research

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 1999


                              66 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1997 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                    October 20, 1997, Monday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A6

LENGTH: 625 words

HEADLINE: Baby gene tinkering decried Scientist who cloned Dolly sounds warning

BYLINE: CP)

DATELINE: JASPER, Alta.

BODY:

   The Scottish scientist who successfully cloned the world's first adult sheep
spoke out strongly against those who would use his technique to create so-called
"designer babies."

   Although the reality of such tinkering may be a decade away, "remember there
are people who are already thinking of this," Ian Wilmut warned about 650
Alberta science teachers attending their annual conference in Jasper on the
weekend.

   "Once the (human) genome mapping project has come up with the genes for
intelligence, or let's say you're sensitive about (your child developing)
baldness," some will advocate trying to change or add these genes after a human
embryo is made in the petri dish, the 53-year-old geneticist predicted.

   To do this would be wrong because it would put humankind on a slippery slope
where it is impossible to draw the line of where to stop, he said.

   "To let us rip with this present technology . . . is akin to letting a high
school kid loose not just with a sports car, but a jet airplane," he said.

   Traits such as intelligence or hair colour are complex and controlled by many
genes at once, unlike some diseases which involve a mutation on only one gene,
he said.

   "So, for a prolonged period of time, I personally would frown on this . . .
By changing these complex traits, we might do more harm than good."

   It is important that science and technology start to explain better the new
genetics in the classroom so the next generation of Canadians will understand
whether these kinds of advances are acceptable to them or not, Wilmut added.

   The technique used to clone Dolly the sheep opened the door to such
possibilities because it gives future scientists confidence they can take one
cell from an in-vitro human embryo, make changes to genes within that cell and
then replace the cell back into the embryo or into another human egg from which
the genetic material has been removed.

   If the latter is done, the egg would be given a jolt of electricity and
implanted in a woman's womb. Once born, the child would be identical to the one
that would have developed from the first embryo made in the petri dish, except
it would have improved characteristics.

   GERM-LINE THERAPY

   However, Wilmut said he supports doing this if it means eliminating a genetic
disease such as cystic fibrosis in not only that human embryo, but all of its
resulting offspring as well.

   A federal bill that proposed banning this kind of genetic technology, called
germ-line therapy, died on the order paper when the national election was called
last spring.

   A ban on 12 other reproductive technologies was also contained in the bill,
which may be reintroduced this year.

   Wilmut caused some murmurs in the audience when he said he's seriously
contemplating cloning sheep that have a genetic error deliberately added to
their cells so that they will develop cystic fibrosis after they are born.

   "I'm quite sure there are some people for whom the idea of deliberately
creating animals that are sick is deeply offensive," he said. "I understand
that."

   But cystic fibrosis, currently incurable, kills many children because of an
error in just one gene, Wilmut said. Because sheep have a similar respiratory
tract to humans, it's highly likely a cure could be discovered for humans by
first testing new drugs or gene therapy on sheep, he said.

   "I think, in the end, this is one of the many judgments that society will
have to make whether it . . . is acceptable to them," Wilmut said.

   Also on the weekend, the Sunday Times reported that British scientists at
Bath University had created a frog embryo without a head, a technique that could
lead to the production of headless human clones to grow organs and tissues for
transplant.


LOAD-DATE: October 21, 1997


                              67 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1997 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                    October 20, 1997, Monday, METRO EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A6

LENGTH: 639 words

HEADLINE: Baby gene tinkering decried Scientist who cloned Dolly sounds warning

BYLINE: (CP)

DATELINE: JASPER, Alta.

BODY:

   JASPER, Alta. (CP) - The Scottish scientist who successfully cloned the
world's first adult sheep spoke out strongly against those who would use his
technique to create so-called "designer babies."

   Although the reality of such tinkering may be a decade away, "remember there
are people who are already thinking of this," Ian Wilmut warned about 650
Alberta science teachers attending their annual conference in Jasper on the
weekend.

   "Once the (human) genome mapping project has come up with the genes for
intelligence, or let's say you're sensitive about (your child developing)
baldness," some will advocate trying to change or add these genes after a human
embryo is made in the petri dish, the 53-year-old geneticist predicted.

   To do this would be wrong because it would put humankind on a slippery slope
where it is impossible to draw the line of where to stop, he said.

   "To let us rip with this present technology . . . is akin to letting a high
school kid loose not just with a sports car, but a jet airplane," he said.

   Traits such as intelligence or hair colour are complex and controlled by many
genes at once, unlike some diseases which involve a mutation on only one gene,
he said.

   "So, for a prolonged period of time, I personally would frown on this . . .
By changing these complex traits, we might do more harm than good."

   It is important that science and technology start to explain better the new
genetics in the classroom so the next generation of Canadians will understand
whether these kinds of advances are acceptable to them or not, Wilmut added.

   The technique used to clone Dolly the sheep opened the door to such
possibilities because it gives future scientists confidence they can take one
cell from an in-vitro human embryo, make changes to genes within that cell and
then replace the cell back into the embryo or into another human egg from which
the genetic material has been removed.

   If the latter is done, the egg would be given a jolt of electricity and
implanted in a woman's womb. Once born, the child would be identical to the one
that would have developed from the first embryo made in the petri dish, except
it would have improved characteristics.

   GERM-LINE THERAPY

   However, Wilmut said he supports doing this if it means eliminating a genetic
disease such as cystic fibrosis in not only that human embryo, but all of its
resulting offspring as well.

   A federal bill that proposed banning this kind of genetic technology, called
germ-line therapy, died on the order paper when the national election was called
last spring.

   A ban on 12 other reproductive technologies was also contained in the bill,
which may be reintroduced this year.

   Wilmut caused some murmurs in the audience when he said he's seriously
contemplating cloning sheep that have a genetic error deliberately added to
their cells so that they will develop cystic fibrosis after they are born.

   "I'm quite sure there are some people for whom the idea of deliberately
creating animals that are sick is deeply offensive," he said. "I understand
that."

   But cystic fibrosis, currently incurable, kills many children because of an
error in just one gene, Wilmut said. Because sheep have a similar respiratory
tract to humans, it's highly likely a cure could be discovered for humans by
first testing new drugs or gene therapy on sheep, he said.

   "I think, in the end, this is one of the many judgments that society will
have to make whether it . . . is acceptable to them," Wilmut said.

   Also on the weekend, the Sunday Times reported that British scientists at
Bath University had created a frog embryo without a head, a technique that could
lead to the production of headless human clones to grow organs and tissues for
transplant.genetics; research; ethics; Ian; Wilmut; age; statement

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 1999


                              68 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1997 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                    October 10, 1997, Friday, METRO EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A32

LENGTH: 515 words

HEADLINE: Scientists use drug to 'switch off' pain nerves

BYLINE: Reuter

DATELINE: Washington

BODY:

   WASHINGTON (Reuter) - Scientists said yesterday they had found a very small
group of spinal nerves that might be responsible for chronic pain - and a "time
bomb" drug that shuts them off.

   Tests in rats showed it was possible to turn off the "bad" pain -
hypersensitivity that plagues arthritis sufferers, for instance - without
costing them the "good" pain reflexes that keep the body away from a hot flame.

   Patrick Mantyh of the University of Minnesota and colleagues worked on a
small number of nerve cells that snag substance P - a peptide known to be
involved in pain. They have special receptors, or chemical grappling hooks, that
are specially designed to grab substance P so it can be absorbed by the cell.

   "We're beginning to uncover the chemistry of pain at a level we never
understood before," Mantyh said in a statement.

   "It shows that there's an extremely small population of cells - no more than
1 per cent of spinal nerves - that plays a pivotal role in the generation of
chronic pain."

   Members of Mantyh's team thought they could attach a poison to substance P
and kill off these cells, known as nociceptors, killing the pain sensation too.

   They used a drug developed by Douglas Lappi at Advanced Targeting Systems in
San Diego that combines substance P with saporin. Saporin stops cells from
making proteins, effectively shutting them down.

   When they injected this drug into the spinal cords of rats, the nociceptors
soaked it up and died, they wrote in a report in the journal Science.

   REVOLUTIONARY RESEARCH

   Mantyh and colleagues then tested the pain reflexes of the rats. The rats
reacted normally to pain such as heat but did not react as strongly as normal
rats to injections of capsaicin - the substance that makes peppers hot and that
is used to simulate extreme or chronic pain in experiments.

   "This treatment signals a revolution in pain research," Mantyh said, adding
that it was difficult to dull chronic or intense pain without also dulling the
senses needed to tell the body it was in danger.

   "For example, chronic pain patients who received this treatment would still
have the reflex to remove their hands from a hot stove and their nervous systems
would still communicate the news of an injury to the body," he said.

   Tests in humans are a long way off but Mantyh said the idea of sending a
time-bomb poison into cells could be used for gene therapy - by tying the
appropriate gene to substance P and letting the cells absorb it.

   A second study in Science indicated this could be a possible approach to pain
therapy. Annika Malmberg and colleagues at the University of California, San
Francisco found "bad" pain required the production of protein kinase-C (PKC).

   Mice genetically engineered to lack the gene for this protein had normal pain
reflexes but did not develop chronic pain after surgery to their sciatic nerve,
which should have generated pain hypersensitivity.

   Malmberg's team also found just a small number of nerve cells produced PKC
and said it could be a target for new pain drugs.research; drug

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 1999


                              69 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1997 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                   September 21, 1997, Sunday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. F8

LENGTH: 45 words

HEADLINE: Eureka

BODY:


    Swiss researchers using X-ray crystallography and synchrotron radiation have
found the elementary structure of the chromosome in atomic detail. It is a
crucial clue to understanding how chromosomes are put together and may lead to
improved human gene therapy.


LOAD-DATE: September 22, 1997


                              70 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1997 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

               September 21, 1997, Sunday, SUNDAY SECOND EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. F8

LENGTH: 47 words

HEADLINE: Eureka

BODY:

   Swiss researchers using X-ray crystallography and synchrotron radiation have
found the elementary structure of the chromosome in atomic detail. It is a
crucial clue to understanding how chromosomes are put together and may lead to
improved human gene therapy.genetics

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 1999


                              71 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1997 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                      July 25, 1997, Friday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A4

LENGTH: 298 words

HEADLINE: Lamb with human genes, Polly joins the clone club Identical sheep
produce materials for medical use

BYLINE: REUTER)

DATELINE: LONDON

BODY:

   The British scientists who cloned Dolly the sheep said yesterday they had
made a major advance by cloning Polly the lamb, who carries human genes.

   This means they can clone herds of identical sheep that produce human
proteins or blood products for medical use.

   Polly and four near-identical sisters are transgenic: They are sheep but they
carry a human gene.

   "It was what we told everybody we were going to do, but it's nice to be able
to say we have done it," Ron James, managing director of PPL Therapeutics, said
in a telephone interview.

   "This is a demonstration that we can genetically modify the cells and then
make transgenic animals, which is a world first."

   PPL's scientists have cloned sheep before, not only Dolly but nine others
using other techniques. They have also created many transgenic animals, one at a
time.

   This is the first time they have been able to combine the two technologies.

   The five Polly Dorset lambs were not created using the stunning technology
that produced Dolly.

   Dolly was the first mammal cloned from an adult cell. Polly and her virtually
identical sisters were created by fusing a fibroblast cell from a fetus to an
egg cell.

   The PPL team genetically modified the fetal cells before they cloned them.

   Two of the five lambs have so-called marker genes, which are easy for
scientists to find and verify in the animal.

   "Three of them are carrying a human gene of therapeutic value. I'm not going
to say what it is," James said.

   The company's sheep produce alpha-1-antitrypsin, a blood protein used to
treat the symptoms of cystic fibrosis.

   They also have been genetically engineered to produce fibrinogen, factor VII
and factor IX: all blood clotting products and activated protein C, which
prevents clotting.


GRAPHIC: REUTER photo: SCIENTIFIC FIRST: Polly, the cloned lamb shown with her
surrogate mother, is the world's first transgenic animal, carrying both sheep
and human genes.

LOAD-DATE: July 29, 1997


                              72 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1997 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                      July 25, 1997, Friday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A12

LENGTH: 350 words

HEADLINE: Protein therapy seen as new way to battle Lou Gehrig's disease

BYLINE: AP)

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   Scientists have delayed the onset of Lou Gehrig's disease by giving
genetically engineered mice a protein that prevents cell death, suggesting a new
way to fight the killer disease.

   The gene therapy did not cure the disease, officially described as
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, said the study in today's edition of the journal
Science.

   But the protein delayed the inherited form of ALS from striking mice carrying
the disease.

   That suggests such therapy may benefit ALS patients "in whom treatment can be
started before the onset of symptoms," Dr. Serge Przedborski of Columbia
University in New York City wrote.

   Most Lou Gehrig's disease is not inherited but arises sporadically. About
30,000 Americans have the disease, named for the baseball legend it destroyed.

   Sue Rodriguez, the British Columbian who committed suicide in 1996 after
unsuccessfully challenging Canada's law against assisted suicide, suffered from
the disease.

   Przedborski, noting cell death can be similar in both inherited and
non-inherited ALS, suggested cell-protective therapies be investigated for both
types.

   "This is a new avenue to pursue," said National Institutes of Health
neuroscientist Al Kerza-Kwiatecki. Still, "they were slowing down the onset (of
ALS). But when you get it . . . there is no stopping it."

   "But it's very, very interesting that the disease is postponed. This is
encouraging," said Dr. Teepu Siddique of Chicago's Northwestern University, who
created the ALS-carrying mouse breed Columbia used.

   Siddique is studying people with familial ALS to see if doctors can predict
when they will get sick.

   The human proto-oncogene called Bcl-2 produces a protein that regulates cell
death. Przedborski cross-bred ALS mice with mice who produced high levels of
human Bcl-2, to see if it would postpone illness in the new generation of mice.

   Bcl-2 delayed the onset of Lou Gehrig's by 19 per cent. Thus, the Bcl-2 mice
lived 15 per cent longer than the original ALS mice - although once their
symptoms began, the protein did not slow the disease's inevitable progression.


LOAD-DATE: July 29, 1997


                              73 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1997 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                      July 25, 1997, Friday, METRO EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A12

LENGTH: 363 words

HEADLINE: Protein therapy seen as new way to battle Lou Gehrig's disease

BYLINE: (AP)

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   WASHINGTON (AP) - Scientists have delayed the onset of Lou Gehrig's disease
by giving genetically engineered mice a protein that prevents cell death,
suggesting a new way to fight the killer disease.

   The gene therapy did not cure the disease, officially described as
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, said the study in today's edition of the journal
Science.

   But the protein delayed the inherited form of ALS from striking mice carrying
the disease.

   That suggests such therapy may benefit ALS patients "in whom treatment can be
started before the onset of symptoms," Dr. Serge Przedborski of Columbia
University in New York City wrote.

   Most Lou Gehrig's disease is not inherited but arises sporadically. About
30,000 Americans have the disease, named for the baseball legend it destroyed.

   Sue Rodriguez, the British Columbian who committed suicide in 1996 after
unsuccessfully challenging Canada's law against assisted suicide, suffered from
the disease.

   Przedborski, noting cell death can be similar in both inherited and
non-inherited ALS, suggested cell-protective therapies be investigated for both
types.

   "This is a new avenue to pursue," said National Institutes of Health
neuroscientist Al Kerza-Kwiatecki. Still, "they were slowing down the onset (of
ALS). But when you get it . . . there is no stopping it."

   "But it's very, very interesting that the disease is postponed. This is
encouraging," said Dr. Teepu Siddique of Chicago's Northwestern University, who
created the ALS-carrying mouse breed Columbia used.

   Siddique is studying people with familial ALS to see if doctors can predict
when they will get sick.

   The human proto-oncogene called Bcl-2 produces a protein that regulates cell
death. Przedborski cross-bred ALS mice with mice who produced high levels of
human Bcl-2, to see if it would postpone illness in the new generation of mice.

   Bcl-2 delayed the onset of Lou Gehrig's by 19 per cent. Thus, the Bcl-2 mice
lived 15 per cent longer than the original ALS mice - although once their
symptoms began, the protein did not slow the disease's inevitable
progression.medicine; genetics; health; research; United; States

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 1999


                              74 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1997 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                      July 25, 1997, Friday, METRO EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A4

LENGTH: 301 words

HEADLINE: Lamb with human genes, Polly joins the clone club Identical sheep
produce materials for medical use

BYLINE: (Reuter)

DATELINE: LONDON

BODY:

   LONDON (Reuter) - The British scientists who cloned Dolly the sheep said
yesterday they had made a major advance by cloning Polly the lamb, who carries
human genes.

   This means they can clone herds of identical sheep that produce human
proteins or blood products for medical use.

   Polly and four near-identical sisters are transgenic: They are sheep but they
carry a human gene.

   "It was what we told everybody we were going to do, but it's nice to be able
to say we have done it," Ron James, managing director of PPL Therapeutics, said
in a telephone interview.

   "This is a demonstration that we can genetically modify the cells and then
make transgenic animals, which is a world first."

   PPL's scientists have cloned sheep before, not only Dolly but nine others
using other techniques. They have also created many transgenic animals, one at a
time.

   This is the first time they have been able to combine the two technologies.

   The five Polly Dorset lambs were not created using the stunning technology
that produced Dolly.

   Dolly was the first mammal cloned from an adult cell. Polly and her virtually
identical sisters were created by fusing a fibroblast cell from a fetus to an
egg cell.

   The PPL team genetically modified the fetal cells before they cloned them.

   Two of the five lambs have so-called marker genes, which are easy for
scientists to find and verify in the animal.

   "Three of them are carrying a human gene of therapeutic value. I'm not going
to say what it is," James said.

   The company's sheep produce alpha-1-antitrypsin, a blood protein used to
treat the symptoms of cystic fibrosis.

   They also have been genetically engineered to produce fibrinogen, factor VII
and factor IX: all blood clotting products and activated protein C, which
prevents clotting.

GRAPHIC: REUTER photo: SCIENTIFIC FIRST: Polly, the cloned lamb shown with her
surrogate mother, is the world's first transgenic animal, carrying both sheep
and human genes.biotechnology; animal; genetics; research; first; Britain

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 1999


                              75 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1997 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                    July 16, 1997, Wednesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A24

LENGTH: 265 words

HEADLINE: Spinal cord function aided by gene therapy Rats partially regained
ability to walk: Study

BYLINE: AP)

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   Gene therapy that stimulates regrowth of nerve cells has helped rats with
severed spinal cords partially recover their ability to walk, a new study shows.

   But scientists caution that it may take years for the promising research to
benefit humans.

   The latest tests mirror the results of earlier research, with slightly better
prospects for helping humans, researchers said.

   The latest developments were reported by researchers at the University of
California San Diego School of Medicine in the July 15 issue of The Journal Of
Neuroscience.

   The experiments took samples of normal skin cells and modified them to
produce a growth protein, neurotrophin-3, which encourages the survival and
growth of nerve cells.

   The skin cells were then grafted to the spine at the injured site of the
rats. The modified cells continuously delivered the growth protein for several
months, further enhancing the regeneration of damaged nerve cells.

   "The goal in spinal injury research is to promote the regrowth of cut or
damaged axons," or specific parts of nerve cells, said Dr. Mark Tuszynski, an
associate neurosciences professor at UCSD School of Medicine and the study's
senior author.

   "These results indicate that cellular delivery of (the growth protein)
through gene therapy can restore function," he said.

   In a study reported last summer, researchers at the Karolinska Institute in
Sweden successfully removed a block of healthy nerve cells from lab rats and
transplanted them to the injured sites where they grew nerve connections across
the gaps of severed spinal cords.


LOAD-DATE: July 18, 1997


                              76 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1997 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                    July 16, 1997, Wednesday, METRO EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A24

LENGTH: 277 words

HEADLINE: Spinal cord function aided by gene therapy Rats partially regained
ability to walk: Study

BYLINE: (AP)

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   WASHINGTON (AP) - Gene therapy that stimulates regrowth of nerve cells has
helped rats with severed spinal cords partially recover their ability to walk, a
new study shows.

   But scientists caution that it may take years for the promising research to
benefit humans.

   The latest tests mirror the results of earlier research, with slightly better
prospects for helping humans, researchers said.

   The latest developments were reported by researchers at the University of
California San Diego School of Medicine in the July 15 issue of The Journal Of
Neuroscience.

   The experiments took samples of normal skin cells and modified them to
produce a growth protein, neurotrophin-3, which encourages the survival and
growth of nerve cells.

   The skin cells were then grafted to the spine at the injured site of the
rats. The modified cells continuously delivered the growth protein for several
months, further enhancing the regeneration of damaged nerve cells.

   "The goal in spinal injury research is to promote the regrowth of cut or
damaged axons," or specific parts of nerve cells, said Dr. Mark Tuszynski, an
associate neurosciences professor at UCSD School of Medicine and the study's
senior author.

   "These results indicate that cellular delivery of (the growth protein)
through gene therapy can restore function," he said.

   In a study reported last summer, researchers at the Karolinska Institute in
Sweden successfully removed a block of healthy nerve cells from lab rats and
transplanted them to the injured sites where they grew nerve connections across
the gaps of severed spinal cords.United; States; genetic; research; disabled

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 1999


                              77 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1997 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                      July 13, 1997, Sunday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. F8

LENGTH: 471 words

HEADLINE: Doctors warn a new Hitler could pervert gene therapy

BYLINE: BY MAGGIE FOX REUTERS NEWS AGENCY

BODY:


    GENE THERAPY could be twisted into a hideous weapon that could target a
Scottish clan or an African tribe and wipe them out, British doctors warn.

   The British Medical Association (BMA) is so worried by the possibility that
it has commissioned a team of geneticists, biologists, lawyers and warfare
experts to see if the technology is possible, and if so, to ban it.

   "It is a particularly horrifying thought," says Dr. Vivienne Nathanson, head
of science and ethics for the BMA, who started the study.

   "If you were a dictator somewhere in the world and you wanted to get rid of a
group of people in your population who were opposing you - whether you are
talking about Hutus and Tutsis in Rwanda, Bosnian Serbs or 1930s Germany - you
could use this," she says.

   Gene therapy homes in on genes that certain people have that are different
and can cause disease. For example, people with cystic fibrosis have easily
identified mutations, as do some sufferers of breast cancer.

   New genes, or therapeutic proteins, can be delivered using engineered DNA -
the basic genetic building material.

   Nathanson says this could be twisted. "If we can target people to have a
therapeutic effect then maybe you could put something in that is dangerous."

   Race war would not be possible; races are too genetically diverse and what
people recognize as "race" has little genetic basis.

   "You are looking for what in Scotland would be a clan or in Africa a tribe,"
Nathanson says. "It's a family grouping where one would expect to see a genetic
similarity."

   Genes targeted by such weapons could control a person's appearance - height
or hair color - or how their bodies process certain drugs.

   "If that is the case, and it is likely to be the case, then it is possible to
say we may have a weapon that is a virus or a chemical compound and has a
genetic targeting component," Nathanson says.

   "We have to recognize that there is a potential for weapons with a fair
degree of selectivity and extraordinary awfulness."

   Such compounds could be delivered as a gas or spray, or put into the water
supply. They could kill, make people infertile or cause the birth of deformed
children.

   "It would probably not be 100 per cent effective but I've never really come
across a dictator who seemed terribly concerned about losing some of their own
population," she says.

   "We are doing the study at the moment using as many lawyers and other experts
as we can to find out whether we think it is feasible," says Nathanson, who
presented her fears to the BMA's annual meeting in Edinburgh.

   "If we do think such weapons are feasible, and so far we haven't heard
anything that we think means they wouldn't be, a ban that works would be
needed," Nathanson says.

   "It would need international collaboration and co-operation."


LOAD-DATE: July 14, 1997


                              78 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1997 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                  July 13, 1997, Sunday, SUNDAY SECOND EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. F8

LENGTH: 476 words

HEADLINE: Doctors warn a new Hitler could pervert gene therapy

BYLINE: By Maggie Fox Reuters News Agency

BODY:

   GENE THERAPY could be twisted into a hideous weapon that could target a
Scottish clan or an African tribe and wipe them out, British doctors warn.

   The British Medical Association (BMA) is so worried by the possibility that
it has commissioned a team of geneticists, biologists, lawyers and warfare
experts to see if the technology is possible, and if so, to ban it.

   "It is a particularly horrifying thought," says Dr. Vivienne Nathanson, head
of science and ethics for the BMA, who started the study.

   "If you were a dictator somewhere in the world and you wanted to get rid of a
group of people in your population who were opposing you - whether you are
talking about Hutus and Tutsis in Rwanda, Bosnian Serbs or 1930s Germany - you
could use this," she says.

   Gene therapy homes in on genes that certain people have that are different
and can cause disease. For example, people with cystic fibrosis have easily
identified mutations, as do some sufferers of breast cancer.

   New genes, or therapeutic proteins, can be delivered using engineered DNA -
the basic genetic building material.

   Nathanson says this could be twisted. "If we can target people to have a
therapeutic effect then maybe you could put something in that is dangerous."

   Race war would not be possible; races are too genetically diverse and what
people recognize as "race" has little genetic basis.

   "You are looking for what in Scotland would be a clan or in Africa a tribe,"
Nathanson says. "It's a family grouping where one would expect to see a genetic
similarity."

   Genes targeted by such weapons could control a person's appearance - height
or hair color - or how their bodies process certain drugs.

   "If that is the case, and it is likely to be the case, then it is possible to
say we may have a weapon that is a virus or a chemical compound and has a
genetic targeting component," Nathanson says.

   "We have to recognize that there is a potential for weapons with a fair
degree of selectivity and extraordinary awfulness."

   Such compounds could be delivered as a gas or spray, or put into the water
supply. They could kill, make people infertile or cause the birth of deformed
children.

   "It would probably not be 100 per cent effective but I've never really come
across a dictator who seemed terribly concerned about losing some of their own
population," she says.

   "We are doing the study at the moment using as many lawyers and other experts
as we can to find out whether we think it is feasible," says Nathanson, who
presented her fears to the BMA's annual meeting in Edinburgh.

   "If we do think such weapons are feasible, and so far we haven't heard
anything that we think means they wouldn't be, a ban that works would be
needed," Nathanson says.

   "It would need international collaboration and co-operation."genetics;
Britain; arms

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 1999


                              79 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1997 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                     June 12, 1997, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. D9

LENGTH: 642 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy needs caution

BYLINE: DR. MARJORIE KEYMER

BODY:


    It creates media frenzies in spectacular court cases. It convicts criminals
and seizes the imagination of terminally ill cancer patients. It is the building
block of every living being.

   DNA, our chemical fingerprint, is our link with the past and our bequest to
the future.

   DNA sequences are combined into genes that carry chemical codes reflected in
human characteristics. Eye color, blood type, height, tendency toward diseases
and life span are all determined, at least in part, by our genetic make-up.

   In the early years of the 21st century, scientists co-operating worldwide
will map the entire human genome (all the genetic material that defines us).

   As we move ever closer to that day, we are bombarded with information about
genetic discoveries, re-engineering, finger-printing and the risk of genetic
disorders.

   We are quick to cheer each find, particularly if it carries the promise of
prevention or cure of illness. With each discovery, there is pressure to apply
it to clinical settings. Commercial labs bring the opportunity to screen people
at risk.

   Genetic discoveries hold great promise. We will be able to prevent genetic
characteristics from being inherited by recoding an abnormal gene in sperm and
eggs prior to conception.

   We now are experimenting with innovative genetic treatment of advanced cancer
victims to make their cancer cells more susceptible to treatment. For decades,
we have screened pregnant mothers for genetic disorders in unborn fetuses. We
can identify genes linked with deadly diseases by simple blood tests.

   As science develops high technology capable of manipulating genes at the
sub-cellular level, concerns about the ethics and morals of applying these
technologies are emerging. What technology will we embrace? Who will decide? Who
will control the application of genetic technology?

   Scientists recognize both the power and the risks of applying genetic
technology. An editorial in the May 15, 1997 issue of the New England Journal of
Medicine addresses the risks of misapplying gene-based statistical prophecies.

   Four separate studies in this issue dispute earlier statistical prophecies
about the risk of breast and ovarian cancer in women who carry a
cancer-susceptibility gene (BRCA-1) identified in 1994.

   The 1994 predictions were so ominous that some women with the gene considered
removal of breasts and ovaries while they were still healthy because of their
fear of cancer of these organs.

   Only now, three years later, is evidence emerging that suggests the early
studies overestimated the risk of cancer in BRCA-1 carriers.

   Our ability to accurately predict risk of disease based on the presence of a
specific gene now is limited to a few well-known genetic diseases. As we
identify more genes, it is imperative to take a conservative approach.

   We know that few genes work alone. Most require the modifying effect of diet,
environment, hormones and other genes to cause problems. Unfortunately, our
ability to identify genetic abnormalities through easily available lab tests
outstrips our understanding of the importance and impact of the results.

   Our technical ability to manipulate genes is emerging faster than our ability
to determine how we wish to apply it.

   At present, any decision to be DNA tested must be preceded by expert advice
(genetic counselling). There are no simple answers to the questions that emerge
once you are proved to carry a gene that may be detrimental to your health or
that of your children. Understanding the potential problems before testing is
essential.

   The science is exciting and, undoubtedly, will completely modify our
understanding of human biology. Unfortunately, at present, many of our
predicitions are primitive at best. Buyer beware. The views expressed are those
of the author, a practising physician.


LOAD-DATE: June 14, 1997


                              80 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1997 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                     June 12, 1997, Thursday, METRO EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. D9

LENGTH: 647 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy needs caution

BYLINE: Dr. Marjorie Keymer

BODY:

   It creates media frenzies in spectacular court cases. It convicts criminals
and seizes the imagination of terminally ill cancer patients. It is the building
block of every living being.

   DNA, our chemical fingerprint, is our link with the past and our bequest to
the future.

   DNA sequences are combined into genes that carry chemical codes reflected in
human characteristics. Eye color, blood type, height, tendency toward diseases
and life span are all determined, at least in part, by our genetic make-up.

   In the early years of the 21st century, scientists co-operating worldwide
will map the entire human genome (all the genetic material that defines us).

   As we move ever closer to that day, we are bombarded with information about
genetic discoveries, re-engineering, finger-printing and the risk of genetic
disorders.

   We are quick to cheer each find, particularly if it carries the promise of
prevention or cure of illness. With each discovery, there is pressure to apply
it to clinical settings. Commercial labs bring the opportunity to screen people
at risk.

   Genetic discoveries hold great promise. We will be able to prevent genetic
characteristics from being inherited by recoding an abnormal gene in sperm and
eggs prior to conception.

   We now are experimenting with innovative genetic treatment of advanced cancer
victims to make their cancer cells more susceptible to treatment. For decades,
we have screened pregnant mothers for genetic disorders in unborn fetuses. We
can identify genes linked with deadly diseases by simple blood tests.

   As science develops high technology capable of manipulating genes at the
sub-cellular level, concerns about the ethics and morals of applying these
technologies are emerging. What technology will we embrace? Who will decide? Who
will control the application of genetic technology?

   Scientists recognize both the power and the risks of applying genetic
technology. An editorial in the May 15, 1997 issue of the New England Journal of
Medicine addresses the risks of misapplying gene-based statistical prophecies.

   Four separate studies in this issue dispute earlier statistical prophecies
about the risk of breast and ovarian cancer in women who carry a
cancer-susceptibility gene (BRCA-1) identified in 1994.

   The 1994 predictions were so ominous that some women with the gene considered
removal of breasts and ovaries while they were still healthy because of their
fear of cancer of these organs.

   Only now, three years later, is evidence emerging that suggests the early
studies overestimated the risk of cancer in BRCA-1 carriers.

   Our ability to accurately predict risk of disease based on the presence of a
specific gene now is limited to a few well-known genetic diseases. As we
identify more genes, it is imperative to take a conservative approach.

   We know that few genes work alone. Most require the modifying effect of diet,
environment, hormones and other genes to cause problems. Unfortunately, our
ability to identify genetic abnormalities through easily available lab tests
outstrips our understanding of the importance and impact of the results.

   Our technical ability to manipulate genes is emerging faster than our ability
to determine how we wish to apply it.

   At present, any decision to be DNA tested must be preceded by expert advice
(genetic counselling). There are no simple answers to the questions that emerge
once you are proved to carry a gene that may be detrimental to your health or
that of your children. Understanding the potential problems before testing is
essential.

   The science is exciting and, undoubtedly, will completely modify our
understanding of human biology. Unfortunately, at present, many of our
predicitions are primitive at best. Buyer beware. The views expressed are those
of the author, a practising physician.Health; genetics; research

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 1999


                              81 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1997 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                     May 29, 1997, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: FEATURE; Pg. G1

LENGTH: 1118 words

HEADLINE: North Bay mom in vigil as preemie gasps for life Baby Bailey TEF:
Cleft Lip, Palette

BYLINE: BY JANICE BRADBEER TORONTO STAR

BODY:


    CHRISTINE WALSH straddles two worlds these days: the Neonatal Intensive Care
Unit at Sick Kids where she spends time with her baby Bailey, and the life she
has put on hold up in North Bay.

   Walsh has been a small town person her entire life. She finds Toronto
paradoxical: crowded with people yet isolating. "I feel so lonely in Toronto,"
says Walsh. "I'll be at a streetcar stop and there'll be 15 people there.
They're looking so angry - they don't smile."

   The separation from her husband Paul Bentley and her other children -
Jessica, 10 and Michael, 8, is especially difficult.

   On the day she was interviewed, Walsh was back in North Bay for a couple of
days, before hopping in her car to make the 3 1/2 hour trek to her brother's
Toronto apartment. There she would resume her routine. Each morning she takes
the 20-minute walk to Sick Kids to spend the day with Bailey. "I play with her,
I rock her, I change her diaper and take her temperature," says Walsh, 31.

   Then she goes home and waits for morning. It's that simple.

   Bailey was born on New Year's Day at 29 weeks gestation. Walsh had
complications during pregnancy, including leaking amniotic fluid. After 25
weeks, she was flown to Mount Sinai Hospital in Toronto when her water became
mixed with blood. Walsh was placed on bed rest and clung to the pregnancy day by
day. At 29 weeks, she had an emergency Caesarean section when Bailey's heart
rate dropped.

   Four hours after Bailey was born weighing 920 grams (about 2 pounds), she was
whisked off to the neonatal intensive care unit at Sick Kids where she was
ventilated and intubated.

   Bailey was found to have a cleft lip and palate, curvature of the spine and
TEF. That's short for tracheal esophageal fistula. TEF occurred when Bailey was
in her mother's womb. The trachea and esophagus usually develop as one and then
separate into two. For some reason, Bailey's didn't separate.

   A few centimetres of her esophagus were also missing.

   A G-tube inserted into her tiny stomach provided nourishment until she could
grow to an ideal weight of 1.8 to 2.25 kilograms (4 1/2 pounds) for surgery.

   Surgery on babies weighing less than 1,200 grams is technically impossible.
According to Dr. Sigmund Ein, the Sick Kids surgeon who operated on Bailey. TEF
babies who are over 2.5 kilograms have a 100 per cent survival rate, barring
other problems. If their weight is less and if they have associated
abnormalities, the survival rate dips.

   Ein has performed about 150 of these operations at Sick Kids and says they
are fairly common. The children will have trouble swallowing for the rest of
their lives. "But if Bailey chews her food well, eats slowly and drinks with her
meals - in other words, does what we all should be doing - she'll be normal," he
says.

   Last month, when Bailey had reached 2.5 kilograms, she had successful surgery
to repair the TEF. She still gets nourishment from the G-tube, since she has
trouble sucking or taking from a bottle. Back in February she needed emergency
surgery to save her life when one of her feeding tubes became misplaced.

   Now Bailey's mother plays the waiting game. She's gingerly trying to
introduce her newborn to bottled formula. She watches her blue-eyed girl with
the reddish tuff of hair and feisty spirit grow, gram by gram. (Bailey now
weighs close to 3 kilograms). Bailey was facing another operation, this time to
repair her hernia. If all goes well, she should be home soon in North Bay.

   She will probably require surgery in September to repair her cleft lip. When
she's 10, she'll have an operation on her cleft palate. Sometime in the future,
surgery will also be necessary to to repair her curvature of the spine.

   Since her birth, mother Walsh has been tied like an umbilical cord to
Bailey's bedside and rarely makes it home to North Bay. Her husband, a jeweller,
and the rest of the family drive down every other weekend to see her and involve
themselves in Bailey's care.

   "Thank God for my support system," Walsh says of her family. "When Paul and
the kids are there we can talk about our feelings. You just have to take one day
at a time."

   Daughter Jessica chose to write about premature babies for her science
project back home. Much of what she has written involves her own feelings
surrounding Bailey, says Walsh.

   Although it's been hard for her to cope, Walsh has been grateful for the
small kindnesses extended to her. One nurse, Susan Jenereaul, has done some
"very thoughtful and sweet things," she says.

   If Jenereaul is on the night shift, she'll leave a note from Bailey saying
she had a good night. She takes pictures of Bailey and writes cute sayings on
them. Walsh says these keepsakes of thoughtfulness "bring tears of joy to my
eyes."

   Thanks to new technologies and more sophisticated respirators, preemies like
Bailey have come a long way in terms of survival, says Dr. Keith Tanswell,
acting head of neonatology at Sick Kids. Neonatology is the branch of medicine
that specializes in newborn babies.

   Last fall, Tanswell was appointed to the chair in neonatology that is
sponsored by the Sick Kids' Women's Auxiliary and the University of Toronto. The
research chair is endowed at $ 2 million and is the first of 14 planned over the
next four years to focus on research and education.

   Preemies born at 25 weeks gestation now have a 70 per cent chance of survival
- with intensive care - compared to negligible odds 20 years ago, he says.

   A preemie's weak lungs are "the critical initial problem that can influence
survival," says Tanswell.

   Often, those born at 37 weeks or less have a deficiency in surfactant, a
chemical in our lungs that keeps the air sacs from deflating like a balloon.
Although preemies can be given surfactant upon birth, the sheer tininess of
their lungs can pose other risks.

   This is particularly true with extremely premature infants. The respirator
used to help little Bailey breathe can damage the lungs of babies born at 25
weeks.

   Tanswell is doing research into gene therapy to prevent lung damage in the
premature infant. Perhaps 10 years from now, gene therapy will be used on
preemies like Bailey to halt potential lung damage, he says.

   For Christine Walsh, her biggest goal is getting Bailey to North Bay, for the
big family bash that is being planned to welcome the baby home.

   "I want a stroller - I keep on saying this - with big wheels and I want to
take her for walks and more walks and take her to the ball games and show her
off," she says.

   *Just last week, the family got happy news - they were free to take Bailey
home to North Bay. A 6 1/2-minute documentary on the baby will air during this
weekend's telethon.


GRAPHIC: STAR COLOR PHOTO (Stawicki): IN CARE OF: Only two pounds at birth,
Bailey Walsh-Bentley had to gain weight first before urgent surgery could be
performed. She's with mother Christine and her nurse, Susan Jenereaul.

LOAD-DATE: May 30, 1997


                              82 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1997 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                     May 29, 1997, Thursday, METRO EDITION

SECTION: FEATURE; Pg. G1

LENGTH: 1119 words

HEADLINE: North Bay mom in vigil as preemie gasps for life Baby Bailey TEF:
Cleft Lip, Palette

BYLINE: By Janice Bradbeer TORONTO STAR

BODY:

   CHRISTINE WALSH straddles two worlds these days: the Neonatal Intensive Care
Unit at Sick Kids where she spends time with her baby Bailey, and the life she
has put on hold up in North Bay.

   Walsh has been a small town person her entire life. She finds Toronto
paradoxical: crowded with people yet isolating. "I feel so lonely in Toronto,"
says Walsh. "I'll be at a streetcar stop and there'll be 15 people there.
They're looking so angry - they don't smile."

   The separation from her husband Paul Bentley and her other children -
Jessica, 10 and Michael, 8, is especially difficult.

   On the day she was interviewed, Walsh was back in North Bay for a couple of
days, before hopping in her car to make the 3 1/2 hour trek to her brother's
Toronto apartment. There she would resume her routine. Each morning she takes
the 20-minute walk to Sick Kids to spend the day with Bailey. "I play with her,
I rock her, I change her diaper and take her temperature," says Walsh, 31.

   Then she goes home and waits for morning. It's that simple.

   Bailey was born on New Year's Day at 29 weeks gestation. Walsh had
complications during pregnancy, including leaking amniotic fluid. After 25
weeks, she was flown to Mount Sinai Hospital in Toronto when her water became
mixed with blood. Walsh was placed on bed rest and clung to the pregnancy day by
day. At 29 weeks, she had an emergency Caesarean section when Bailey's heart
rate dropped.

   Four hours after Bailey was born weighing 920 grams (about 2 pounds), she was
whisked off to the neonatal intensive care unit at Sick Kids where she was
ventilated and intubated.

   Bailey was found to have a cleft lip and palate, curvature of the spine and
TEF. That's short for tracheal esophageal fistula. TEF occurred when Bailey was
in her mother's womb. The trachea and esophagus usually develop as one and then
separate into two. For some reason, Bailey's didn't separate.

   A few centimetres of her esophagus were also missing.

   A G-tube inserted into her tiny stomach provided nourishment until she could
grow to an ideal weight of 1.8 to 2.25 kilograms (4 1/2 pounds) for surgery.

   Surgery on babies weighing less than 1,200 grams is technically impossible.
According to Dr. Sigmund Ein, the Sick Kids surgeon who operated on Bailey. TEF
babies who are over 2.5 kilograms have a 100 per cent survival rate, barring
other problems. If their weight is less and if they have associated
abnormalities, the survival rate dips.

   Ein has performed about 150 of these operations at Sick Kids and says they
are fairly common. The children will have trouble swallowing for the rest of
their lives. "But if Bailey chews her food well, eats slowly and drinks with her
meals - in other words, does what we all should be doing - she'll be normal," he
says.

   Last month, when Bailey had reached 2.5 kilograms, she had successful surgery
to repair the TEF. She still gets nourishment from the G-tube, since she has
trouble sucking or taking from a bottle. Back in February she needed emergency
surgery to save her life when one of her feeding tubes became misplaced.

   Now Bailey's mother plays the waiting game. She's gingerly trying to
introduce her newborn to bottled formula. She watches her blue-eyed girl with
the reddish tuff of hair and feisty spirit grow, gram by gram. (Bailey now
weighs close to 3 kilograms). Bailey was facing another operation, this time to
repair her hernia. If all goes well, she should be home soon in North Bay.

   She will probably require surgery in September to repair her cleft lip. When
she's 10, she'll have an operation on her cleft palate. Sometime in the future,
surgery will also be necessary to to repair her curvature of the spine.

   Since her birth, mother Walsh has been tied like an umbilical cord to
Bailey's bedside and rarely makes it home to North Bay. Her husband, a jeweller,
and the rest of the family drive down every other weekend to see her and involve
themselves in Bailey's care.

   "Thank God for my support system," Walsh says of her family. "When Paul and
the kids are there we can talk about our feelings. You just have to take one day
at a time."

   Daughter Jessica chose to write about premature babies for her science
project back home. Much of what she has written involves her own feelings
surrounding Bailey, says Walsh.

   Although it's been hard for her to cope, Walsh has been grateful for the
small kindnesses extended to her. One nurse, Susan Jenereaul, has done some
"very thoughtful and sweet things," she says.

   If Jenereaul is on the night shift, she'll leave a note from Bailey saying
she had a good night. She takes pictures of Bailey and writes cute sayings on
them. Walsh says these keepsakes of thoughtfulness "bring tears of joy to my
eyes."

   Thanks to new technologies and more sophisticated respirators, preemies like
Bailey have come a long way in terms of survival, says Dr. Keith Tanswell,
acting head of neonatology at Sick Kids. Neonatology is the branch of medicine
that specializes in newborn babies.

   Last fall, Tanswell was appointed to the chair in neonatology that is
sponsored by the Sick Kids' Women's Auxiliary and the University of Toronto. The
research chair is endowed at $2 million and is the first of 14 planned over the
next four years to focus on research and education.

   Preemies born at 25 weeks gestation now have a 70 per cent chance of survival
- with intensive care - compared to negligible odds 20 years ago, he says.

   A preemie's weak lungs are "the critical initial problem that can influence
survival," says Tanswell.

   Often, those born at 37 weeks or less have a deficiency in surfactant, a
chemical in our lungs that keeps the air sacs from deflating like a balloon.
Although preemies can be given surfactant upon birth, the sheer tininess of
their lungs can pose other risks.

   This is particularly true with extremely premature infants. The respirator
used to help little Bailey breathe can damage the lungs of babies born at 25
weeks.

   Tanswell is doing research into gene therapy to prevent lung damage in the
premature infant. Perhaps 10 years from now, gene therapy will be used on
preemies like Bailey to halt potential lung damage, he says.

   For Christine Walsh, her biggest goal is getting Bailey to North Bay, for the
big family bash that is being planned to welcome the baby home.

   "I want a stroller - I keep on saying this - with big wheels and I want to
take her for walks and more walks and take her to the ball games and show her
off," she says.

   *Just last week, the family got happy news - they were free to take Bailey
home to North Bay. A 6 1/2-minute documentary on the baby will air during this
weekend's telethon.

GRAPHIC: STAR COLOR PHOTO (Stawicki): IN CARE OF: Only two pounds at birth,
Bailey Walsh-Bentley had to gain weight first before urgent surgery could be
performed. She's with mother Christine and her nurse, Susan Jenereaul.special;
section; Sick; Kids; Telethon; Hospital; for; Sick; Children; fundraising

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 1999


                              83 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1997 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                     May 24, 1997, Saturday, FINAL EDITION
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. L21

LENGTH: 739 words

HEADLINE: Contraceptive may pose risk

BODY:


    A new injectable contraceptive, Depo-Provera, may not be a wise choice for
teenagers and women in their 20s, according to an Atlanta doctor.

   Dr. Christine Canterbury of Emory University's department of obstetrics and
gynecology, conducted a study of 207 young patients who had used the drug for
more than 12 months. She found that 63 per cent had low levels of one kind of
estrogen, estradiol, needed to maintain bone health.

   "Our fear is that teenagers and young women in their 20s may not reach their
maximum bone density until their late 20s or early 30s," she told The Medical
Post. "Our concern is that these young women are at a point where their bones
are still growing and we are chemically putting them in a situation where their
estradiol is below the level necessary for maintaining bone."

   Many of the patients had levels as low as those typically seen in women near
menopause, the study found. A few of the teenagers complained of menopausal
symptoms, such as vaginal dryness and hot flashes.

   Depo-Provera was approved for use in Canada earlier this year. It is a
synthetic progesterone, designed to be injected once every three months. It
suppresses ovulation.

   CORD BLOOD: A growing number of new parents whose babies are born at Toronto,
Mount Sinai and Women's College hospitals are choosing to have the umbilical
cord blood stored.

   The blood can be retrieved if the child or some other family member requires
cancer treatment.

   According to a report in the Toronto Hospital magazine Monitor, umbilical
cord blood contains a high concentration of stem cells (also found in bone
marrow). Stem cells produce all the components of blood: red cells, white cells
and platelets.

   When stem cells are obtained from umbilical cord blood instead of bone marrow
transplants, there may be a significantly lower incidence of serious
complications in patients.

   Although stem cell transplants are now primarily used as a treatment for
cancer, they may one day have broader applications.

   "The science surrounding stem cell transplantation and gene therapy is an
emerging field which offers many exciting possibilities for the development of
new treatments," says Dr. Robert Casper, head of reproductive sciences at
Toronto Hospital.

   The cells are collected immediately after birth when the umbilical cord is
separated from the baby, so no invasive procedure or pain is involved. Parents
pay $ 500 for registration and processing of the cord blood and $ 100 a year for
storage fees.

   SLEEP RISK: People who sleep longer than eight hours a night and also nap in
the daytime are twice as likely to suffer a stroke as adults who don't sleep as
much, according to recent study.

   Dr. Wayne Giles, a medical epidemiologist at the Centres for Disease Control
and Prevention in Atlanta, Ga., tracked 8,859 adults for 10 years. Those who
slept more than eight hours a night or took daytime naps were 50 per cent more
likely to suffer a stroke or develop heart disease. Those who did both had the
highest risk of stroke.

   The study was reported in Neurology, the publication of the American Academy
of Neurology.

   Giles says adults who sleep more than eight hours and take naps may have an
underlying sleep-related disorder, such as sleep apnea.

   "This condition will markedly increase the risk for stroke and heart
disease," he explains.

   SIDEWALK ALERT: A hotline designed to help prevent people from falling on
broken sidewalks has been set up in the Kingston area. Anyone can place an
anonymous call to report a sidewalk hazard.

   Kingston General Hospital helped set up the Step Safe Hot Line. According to
the hospital's newspaper, Reports To The Community, any sidewalk that can't be
fixed right away will be sprayed with fluorescent paint to alert pedestrians to
the danger.

   "Not only does the hotline help prevent injury, it also makes economic
sense," the newspaper says. "If this new reporting mechanism prevents just one
serious fall, it will be an excellent investment in terms of hospital care and
other related costs."

   The number (613) 548-7435.

CORRECTION:

   CLARIFICATION: The free quit-smoking program offered through the Toronto
Hospital, mentioned in last week's column, is part of a research project limited
to smokers who have vascular or heart disease or who visited a hospital clinic
for any reason in the last year. Information: (416) 204-1765.

   Marilyn Dunlop's column appears Saturdays.


LOAD-DATE: May 26, 1997


                              84 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1997 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                May 24, 1997, Saturday, SATURDAY SECOND EDITION
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. L21

LENGTH: 744 words

HEADLINE: Contraceptive may pose risk

BODY:

   A new injectable contraceptive, Depo-Provera, may not be a wise choice for
teenagers and women in their 20s, according to an Atlanta doctor.

   Dr. Christine Canterbury of Emory University's department of obstetrics and
gynecology, conducted a study of 207 young patients who had used the drug for
more than 12 months. She found that 63 per cent had low levels of one kind of
estrogen, estradiol, needed to maintain bone health.

   "Our fear is that teenagers and young women in their 20s may not reach their
maximum bone density until their late 20s or early 30s," she told The Medical
Post. "Our concern is that these young women are at a point where their bones
are still growing and we are chemically putting them in a situation where their
estradiol is below the level necessary for maintaining bone."

   Many of the patients had levels as low as those typically seen in women near
menopause, the study found. A few of the teenagers complained of menopausal
symptoms, such as vaginal dryness and hot flashes.

   Depo-Provera was approved for use in Canada earlier this year. It is a
synthetic progesterone, designed to be injected once every three months. It
suppresses ovulation.

   CORD BLOOD: A growing number of new parents whose babies are born at Toronto,
Mount Sinai and Women's College hospitals are choosing to have the umbilical
cord blood stored.

   The blood can be retrieved if the child or some other family member requires
cancer treatment.

   According to a report in the Toronto Hospital magazine Monitor, umbilical
cord blood contains a high concentration of stem cells (also found in bone
marrow). Stem cells produce all the components of blood: red cells, white cells
and platelets.

   When stem cells are obtained from umbilical cord blood instead of bone marrow
transplants, there may be a significantly lower incidence of serious
complications in patients.

   Although stem cell transplants are now primarily used as a treatment for
cancer, they may one day have broader applications.

   "The science surrounding stem cell transplantation and gene therapy is an
emerging field which offers many exciting possibilities for the development of
new treatments," says Dr. Robert Casper, head of reproductive sciences at
Toronto Hospital.

   The cells are collected immediately after birth when the umbilical cord is
separated from the baby, so no invasive procedure or pain is involved. Parents
pay $500 for registration and processing of the cord blood and $100 a year for
storage fees.

   SLEEP RISK: People who sleep longer than eight hours a night and also nap in
the daytime are twice as likely to suffer a stroke as adults who don't sleep as
much, according to recent study.

   Dr. Wayne Giles, a medical epidemiologist at the Centres for Disease Control
and Prevention in Atlanta, Ga., tracked 8,859 adults for 10 years. Those who
slept more than eight hours a night or took daytime naps were 50 per cent more
likely to suffer a stroke or develop heart disease. Those who did both had the
highest risk of stroke.

   The study was reported in Neurology, the publication of the American Academy
of Neurology.

   Giles says adults who sleep more than eight hours and take naps may have an
underlying sleep-related disorder, such as sleep apnea.

   "This condition will markedly increase the risk for stroke and heart
disease," he explains.

   SIDEWALK ALERT: A hotline designed to help prevent people from falling on
broken sidewalks has been set up in the Kingston area. Anyone can place an
anonymous call to report a sidewalk hazard.

   Kingston General Hospital helped set up the Step Safe Hot Line. According to
the hospital's newspaper, Reports To The Community, any sidewalk that can't be
fixed right away will be sprayed with fluorescent paint to alert pedestrians to
the danger.

   "Not only does the hotline help prevent injury, it also makes economic
sense," the newspaper says. "If this new reporting mechanism prevents just one
serious fall, it will be an excellent investment in terms of hospital care and
other related costs."

   The number (613) 548-7435.

CORRECTION:

   CLARIFICATION: The free quit-smoking program offered through the Toronto
Hospital, mentioned in last week's column, is part of a research project limited
to smokers who have vascular or heart disease or who visited a hospital clinic
for any reason in the last year. Information: (416) 204-1765.

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 1999


                              85 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1997 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                    April 26, 1997, Saturday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. N4

LENGTH: 593 words

HEADLINE: Transplanted bone marrow's healing possibilities explored

BYLINE: BY MARILYN DUNLOP

BODY:


    Bone marrow cells, commonly transplanted to provide a healthy blood supply
to patients with leukemia, may soon be used to treat other diseases.

   Bone marrow stem cells produce all kinds of blood cells. Marrow also contains
stromal cells that produce non-blood cells such as bone, cartilage and muscle
cells.

   In a report in the journal Science, Dr. Darwin Prockop, director of the
centre for gene therapy at Allegheny University in Philadelphia, says stromal
cells are relatively easy to isolate from bone marrow and to grow in the
laboratory.

   He outlines recent research with animals, for example, using the cells to
repair joints damaged by osteoarthritis.

   He also describes a clinical trial using children with a severe genetic
disorder, called osteogenesis imperfecta which causes extreme brittleness of
bones.

   The children are receiving bone marrow transplants from healthy donors. It is
hoped the transplanted marrow will contain enough stromal cells to convert
severe bone defects into mild ones.

   PAIN IN THE BACK: Chronic back pain that does not appear to have an
explanation that can be seen on x-rays may be a form of disabling arthritis,
says a University of British Columbia rheumatologist.

   Dr. John Esdaile, director of research at the Arthritis Society's British
Columbia and Yukon division, says in a news release from the society: "These
patients are now told there's nothing wrong with them because their x-rays
appear normal to the untrained eye. Meanwhile, they're enduring incredible
pain."

   In fact, the x-rays are not normal, he says, adding the x-rays of people with
this condition, called diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperstosis, are quite
distinct. Unfortunately, radiologists are not trained to look for the condition.

   Esdaile's team of researchers conducted a study comparing patients with this
condition to healthy people and those with a degenerative back disease called
lumbar spondylosis.

   The study found the arthritis patients had more neck and back pain,
difficulty swallowing, nerve abnormalities and difficulty moving their necks and
backs. These and other symptoms distinguish them from other spinal patients.
ALLERGY TALK: Doctors from the Allergy, Asthma and Immunology Society of Ontario
will hold a panel discussion on allergies and asthma May 13 from 7 to 9 p.m. at
the Burgundy Room, North York Memorial Hall, 5110 Yonge St. Call (416) 633-2215.
PEER PRESSURE STUDY: Fear of ridicule and being laughed at by others is one
reason peer pressure is so effective, particularly among high school students,
says a University of Western Ontario psychology professor.

   Dr. James Olson, along with psychology researcher Leslie Janes, conducted a
study of university students' reactions after they were shown videotapes of a
stand-up comic making fun of someone.

   The students were then asked to perform some tasks, such as throwing a ring
onto a pole in front of the others. They were compared with a group of students
who were not shown the videotapes.

   Olson says those who had seen the tapes showed anxiety about being evaluated.
"I think that their exposure to someone being ridiculed, even in this obviously
fictional way, made them aware of the possibility they could be rejected
themselves. Ridicule probably explains why kids smoke, why they try drugs, why
they drink and drive. Fear of ridicule is a powerful phenomenon."

   The study is reported in the newspaper of the Association of Universities and
Colleges of Canada, University Affairs. Marilyn Dunlop's column appears
Saturdays.


LOAD-DATE: April 28, 1997


                              86 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1997 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

               April 26, 1997, Saturday, SATURDAY SECOND EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. N4

LENGTH: 597 words

HEADLINE: Transplanted bone marrow's healing possibilities explored

BYLINE: By Marilyn Dunlop

BODY:

   Bone marrow cells, commonly transplanted to provide a healthy blood supply to
patients with leukemia, may soon be used to treat other diseases.

   Bone marrow stem cells produce all kinds of blood cells. Marrow also contains
stromal cells that produce non-blood cells such as bone, cartilage and muscle
cells.

   In a report in the journal Science, Dr. Darwin Prockop, director of the
centre for gene therapy at Allegheny University in Philadelphia, says stromal
cells are relatively easy to isolate from bone marrow and to grow in the
laboratory.

   He outlines recent research with animals, for example, using the cells to
repair joints damaged by osteoarthritis.

   He also describes a clinical trial using children with a severe genetic
disorder, called osteogenesis imperfecta which causes extreme brittleness of
bones.

   The children are receiving bone marrow transplants from healthy donors. It is
hoped the transplanted marrow will contain enough stromal cells to convert
severe bone defects into mild ones.

   PAIN IN THE BACK: Chronic back pain that does not appear to have an
explanation that can be seen on x-rays may be a form of disabling arthritis,
says a University of British Columbia rheumatologist.

   Dr. John Esdaile, director of research at the Arthritis Society's British
Columbia and Yukon division, says in a news release from the society: "These
patients are now told there's nothing wrong with them because their x-rays
appear normal to the untrained eye. Meanwhile, they're enduring incredible
pain."

   In fact, the x-rays are not normal, he says, adding the x-rays of people with
this condition, called diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperstosis, are quite
distinct. Unfortunately, radiologists are not trained to look for the condition.

   Esdaile's team of researchers conducted a study comparing patients with this
condition to healthy people and those with a degenerative back disease called
lumbar spondylosis.

   The study found the arthritis patients had more neck and back pain,
difficulty swallowing, nerve abnormalities and difficulty moving their necks and
backs. These and other symptoms distinguish them from other spinal patients.
ALLERGY TALK: Doctors from the Allergy, Asthma and Immunology Society of Ontario
will hold a panel discussion on allergies and asthma May 13 from 7 to 9 p.m. at
the Burgundy Room, North York Memorial Hall, 5110 Yonge St. Call (416) 633-2215.
PEER PRESSURE STUDY: Fear of ridicule and being laughed at by others is one
reason peer pressure is so effective, particularly among high school students,
says a University of Western Ontario psychology professor.

   Dr. James Olson, along with psychology researcher Leslie Janes, conducted a
study of university students' reactions after they were shown videotapes of a
stand-up comic making fun of someone.

   The students were then asked to perform some tasks, such as throwing a ring
onto a pole in front of the others. They were compared with a group of students
who were not shown the videotapes.

   Olson says those who had seen the tapes showed anxiety about being evaluated.
"I think that their exposure to someone being ridiculed, even in this obviously
fictional way, made them aware of the possibility they could be rejected
themselves. Ridicule probably explains why kids smoke, why they try drugs, why
they drink and drive. Fear of ridicule is a powerful phenomenon."

   The study is reported in the newspaper of the Association of Universities and
Colleges of Canada, University Affairs. Marilyn Dunlop's column appears
Saturdays.New; in; Medicine

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 1999


                              87 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1997 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                     April 1, 1997, Tuesday, METRO EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A2

LENGTH: 501 words

HEADLINE: Human chromosomes created in laboratory Advance could help sufferers
of genetic diseases

BYLINE: By Rick Weiss Special to The Star

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   WASHINGTON - Scientists have created the first artificial human chromosomes,
an achievement that may someday allow doctors to alter people's genetic
inheritance or cure diseases by slipping genetic "cassettes" directly into
people's cells.

   The artificial chromosomes, made in the laboratory from a blend of natural
and synthetic human DNA, are miniature versions of human chromosomes - the
corkscrew-shaped structures inside cells that carry all the genes required for
life.

   Scientists, from Ohio, said the long-sought advance marks the first time
anyone has created an artificial human chromosome that can replicate the way
natural chromosomes do every time a cell divides.

   In theory, the chromosomes could be custom designed to ferry curative genes
into people suffering from inherited diseases such as cystic fibrosis, or even
to provide genetic enhancements such as added protection against cancer.

   More immediately, the chromosomes will serve as miniature "laboratory
benches," helping scientists learn how genes are regulated inside cells - a
central question in biology.

   Some people predicted the success also would escalate concerns about
scientists' increasing ability to manipulate genes, which reached new heights in
February with the cloning of an adult sheep.

   Artificial chromosomes will not directly facilitate the cloning of animals or
people, medical ethicists and others said, but they represent a new power over
basic biological and reproductive processes.

   So far, the research team at Case Western Reserve University in Cleveland has
created only a handful of very small artificial chromosomes inside laboratory-
reared human cells, said geneticist John Harrington, who led the work along with
Huntington Willard.

   The group hopes to inject some of the manufactured chromosomes into animals
within six months, a necessary step before considering clinical trials in
people, said Harrington, who is also vice-president of Cleveland-based Athersys
Inc., a biotechnology company that owns the rights to the new technology.

   "We think this may allow us to treat patients at a very young age, maybe
shortly after birth, so the treatment can be delivered to a few cells and then
spread as the cells divide and the child grows," he said.

   Within a year, he said, he hopes to have created a modular system of
prefabricated chromosome parts, each bearing different key genes, which could be
pulled off a laboratory shelf, combined and inserted into a person's cells.

   "It clearly is novel and represents a new approach that seems to work," said
Arno Motulsky, a professor of medicine and genetics at the University of
Washington in Seattle who co-wrote a 1995 federal report that called for the
development of better gene therapy techniques. "You can't go to the lab tomorrow
and start using it for gene therapy. But it's coming along."

   The work was reported in the April issue of the scientific journal Nature
Genetics.genetics; research; United; States

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 1999


                              88 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1997 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                    March 27, 1997, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LETTER; Pg. A26

LENGTH: 251 words

HEADLINE: Scientists oppose human cloning

BODY:


    Contrary to your March 18 article, Scientists appeal to MPs: Don't ban
cloning -- They say it will stunt research, the scientific and medical community
has publicly opposed the cloning of human beings.

   We are calling for amendments to the bill, not its defeat.

   Specifically, we are asking that the bill be amended to allow sperm donors to
be compensated for expenses (parking, transportation or meals) incurred in the
lengthy screening process that is required by law.

   If this is not allowed, then the nearly 6,000 couples who currently rely on
donor sperm to treat their infertility will have to look to the United States
for a donor sperm supply.

   The scientific and medical community is asking that the bill be amended so
that the research needed to develop and improve current infertility treatments
and gene therapies can be continued.

   Rather than relying on the heavy hand of criminal sanctions to regulate some
activities in the new reproductive and genetic technologies, it would be better
to work with the provinces to enlist their support in the establishment of a
national regulatory framework to control all technologies.

   By taking the easy way out, the federal government risks losing the best and
the brightest researchers in the field to such countries as the United States
and Australia, where a thoughtful and logical system of government controls is
in place or evolving.

   Arthur Leader

   Professor of Obstetrics

   Gynecology and Medicine

   University of Ottawa



LOAD-DATE: March 28, 1997


                              89 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1997 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                    March 27, 1997, Thursday, METRO EDITION

SECTION: LETTER; Pg. A26

LENGTH: 255 words

HEADLINE: Scientists oppose human cloning

BODY:

   Contrary to your March 18 article, Scientists appeal to MPs: Don't ban
cloning -- They say it will stunt research, the scientific and medical community
has publicly opposed the cloning of human beings.

   We are calling for amendments to the bill, not its defeat.

   Specifically, we are asking that the bill be amended to allow sperm donors to
be compensated for expenses (parking, transportation or meals) incurred in the
lengthy screening process that is required by law.

   If this is not allowed, then the nearly 6,000 couples who currently rely on
donor sperm to treat their infertility will have to look to the United States
for a donor sperm supply.

   The scientific and medical community is asking that the bill be amended so
that the research needed to develop and improve current infertility treatments
and gene therapies can be continued.

   Rather than relying on the heavy hand of criminal sanctions to regulate some
activities in the new reproductive and genetic technologies, it would be better
to work with the provinces to enlist their support in the establishment of a
national regulatory framework to control all technologies.

   By taking the easy way out, the federal government risks losing the best and
the brightest researchers in the field to such countries as the United States
and Australia, where a thoughtful and logical system of government controls is
in place or evolving.

   Arthur Leader

   Professor of Obstetrics

   Gynecology and Medicine

   University of Ottawa

   Letter Of The Day

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 1999


                              90 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1997 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                     March 24, 1997, Monday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. E1

LENGTH: 1043 words

HEADLINE: Health warrior Dr. Susan Love is taking on doctors, politicians and
even conventional wisdom in her battles over women's health issues

BYLINE: BY NANCY J. WHITE TORONTO STAR

BODY:


    In the battle against breast cancer, surgeon Susan Love is a warrior with an
attitude.

   A leading patient advocate and author of the popular Dr. Susan Love's Breast
Book, she doesn't hide her impatience with traditional treatment, what she
refers to as "slash, burn and poison."

   She has taken on the medical establishment, saying too much time and energy
have been spent on mammography and on promoting breast self-exams, and not
enough on developing more innovative techniques that might detect the cancer
even earlier.

   She's also taken on the U.S. political establishment, helping start a
lobbying group that has boosted breast cancer research funding from $ 90 million
to $ 410 million.

   And Love, a researcher and surgery professor at the University of California
in Los Angeles, has taken on conventional wisdom, warning women not to get too
hung up on exactly the right diet, vitamins and exercise regimen.

   "People forget to live and enjoy their lives. I've learned from working with
women with breast cancer that the difference between me and them is good luck,"
says Love, 49.

   "She makes people think," says Dr. Leo Mahoney, breast cancer surgeon at
Toronto's St. Michael's Hospital. "We get locked up in the status quo. She's got
vision. She's made a tremendous contribution on many levels."

   Now Love is tackling menopause. In her new book, Dr. Susan Love's Hormone
Book, she argues that too often women go on hormone therapy at menopause without
understanding the risks and benefits - or even how sketchy some of the medical
knowledge is.

   "I felt a need to caution women," she says.

   Studies have indicated that hormone therapy after menopause may protect
against osteoporosis and heart disease, but might increase the risk of breast
cancer if taken for more than five years.

   But more good studies are needed, says Dr. Love. "With the limited data we
have, my guess is that we're overestimating the heart benefits of hormone use
and probably underestimating the breast cancer risk."

   Love, who has a quick, easy laugh, readily admits she's a driven person, a
character trait she attributes to her Irish Catholic background. "It was
instilled in me that you have to make the world a better place, that you have to
give back."

   As a young woman, she even joined a convent, although she lasted only five
months.

   She trained as a surgeon in Boston in the 1970s, when few women entered the
discipline. In private practice there, she resisted specializing in breast
surgery, until she saw the paternalistic way male doctors treated breast
patients.

   "I realized I could make a difference. Besides," she laughs, "you have a
different feeling about your breast than about your, say, gall bladder."

   She advocated innovative approaches to breast cancer treatment, including
lumpectomies as opposed to full mastectomies. In 1990, she wrote Dr. Susan
Love's Breast Book, which the New York Times called the bible of women with
breast cancer.

   During a book tour stop in Salt Lake City, Utah, she made a joke to a large
audience of women that to get the attention of politicians they'd have to march
topless on the White House.

   "They came up to me afterward and laughed, and then asked, 'When do we
leave?'

   "It became obvious on the tour that women with breast cancer were really fed
up. AIDS activism was going on and they saw that you could make a difference. It
was time to politicize breast cancer."

   She helped launch the National Breast Cancer Coalition, which has been highly
successful in the United States in increasing research funding.

   In 1992, she was recruited to UCLA, where she started a comprehensive breast
care centre.

   She still lives in southern California with her longtime partner, Dr. Helen
Cooksey, and their 8-year-old daughter. Love conceived the child by artificial
insemination and the couple won a legal fight to jointly adopt the child, giving
them shared parental rights. Cooksey gave up her surgery practice to stay home
with the child.

   Last year, Love quit her clinical practice, calling herself burned out. "It
was getting harder and harder," she says. "The difference between you and the
patient becomes less and less."

   She attributes her decision partly to her menopause, a time when women tend
to take stock of their lives.

   For now, she's not taking hormones, but she would if her symptoms got a lot
worse.

   Taking hormones for four to five years to relieve symptoms doesn't appear to
be risky, she says. "I object to the notion of taking them for the rest of your
life. These are not M&Ms. There may be good arguments for women at high risk for
heart disease or osteoporosis, but not everybody needs to be on it."

   Instead, she's exercising more and eating a healthy diet that includes more
soy, which is believed to have beneficial plant estrogens.

   But she's also taking a healthy dollop of her own advice: Not to get crazed
about doing the "right thing" and not to put off having fun. She spends more
time with her family and has decided to count chocolate - it does come from a
bean - as a vegetable.

   "We have to feed our spirits and souls and keep them happy."

   But that's not to say Love is less driven. She's earning her M.B.A. to become
"bilingual" in business and medicine in these days of constant cost-cutting.

   She's also got a $ 500,000 research grant from the U.S. defence department to
develop an intraductal approach to breast cancer. With a 0.5-mm scope, she's
trying to access the milk ducts through the nipple.

   "Breast cancer starts in the lining of the milk ducts," she explains. "Our
problem has been that we don't have access. With cervical cancer, you can get a
Pap smear. But by the time we see or feel a breast lump, it's been there a long
time.

   "Then it occurred to me that if milk comes out of the nipple, we should be
able to go in."

   One problem, she says, is the inadequate research on breast anatomy, such as
the number of milk ducts or nipple openings. "It never mattered before," says
Love.

   Her deep-felt optimism is infectious. She believes gene therapy and even a
vaccine against breast cancer are possible in the not distant future.

   "We're going to look back at mastectomies, chemotherapy and radiation in
amazement."


GRAPHIC: Star color photo (Lautens): CANCER CRUSADER: Dr. Susan Love has taken
on the medical establishment, saying not enough time has been spent on finding
innovative techniques for earlier breast cancer detection.

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 1997


                              91 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1997 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                     March 24, 1997, Monday, METRO EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. E1

LENGTH: 1045 words

HEADLINE: Health warrior Dr. Susan Love is taking on doctors, politicians and
even conventional wisdom in her battles over women's health issues

BYLINE: By Nancy J. White Toronto Star

BODY:

   In the battle against breast cancer, surgeon Susan Love is a warrior with an
attitude.

   A leading patient advocate and author of the popular Dr. Susan Love's Breast
Book, she doesn't hide her impatience with traditional treatment, what she
refers to as "slash, burn and poison."

   She has taken on the medical establishment, saying too much time and energy
have been spent on mammography and on promoting breast self-exams, and not
enough on developing more innovative techniques that might detect the cancer
even earlier.

   She's also taken on the U.S. political establishment, helping start a
lobbying group that has boosted breast cancer research funding from $90 million
to $410 million.

   And Love, a researcher and surgery professor at the University of California
in Los Angeles, has taken on conventional wisdom, warning women not to get too
hung up on exactly the right diet, vitamins and exercise regimen.

   "People forget to live and enjoy their lives. I've learned from working with
women with breast cancer that the difference between me and them is good luck,"
says Love, 49.

   "She makes people think," says Dr. Leo Mahoney, breast cancer surgeon at
Toronto's St. Michael's Hospital. "We get locked up in the status quo. She's got
vision. She's made a tremendous contribution on many levels."

   Now Love is tackling menopause. In her new book, Dr. Susan Love's Hormone
Book, she argues that too often women go on hormone therapy at menopause without
understanding the risks and benefits - or even how sketchy some of the medical
knowledge is.

   "I felt a need to caution women," she says.

   Studies have indicated that hormone therapy after menopause may protect
against osteoporosis and heart disease, but might increase the risk of breast
cancer if taken for more than five years.

   But more good studies are needed, says Dr. Love. "With the limited data we
have, my guess is that we're overestimating the heart benefits of hormone use
and probably underestimating the breast cancer risk."

   Love, who has a quick, easy laugh, readily admits she's a driven person, a
character trait she attributes to her Irish Catholic background. "It was
instilled in me that you have to make the world a better place, that you have to
give back."

   As a young woman, she even joined a convent, although she lasted only five
months.

   She trained as a surgeon in Boston in the 1970s, when few women entered the
discipline. In private practice there, she resisted specializing in breast
surgery, until she saw the paternalistic way male doctors treated breast
patients.

   "I realized I could make a difference. Besides," she laughs, "you have a
different feeling about your breast than about your, say, gall bladder."

   She advocated innovative approaches to breast cancer treatment, including
lumpectomies as opposed to full mastectomies. In 1990, she wrote Dr. Susan
Love's Breast Book, which the New York Times called the bible of women with
breast cancer.

   During a book tour stop in Salt Lake City, Utah, she made a joke to a large
audience of women that to get the attention of politicians they'd have to march
topless on the White House.

   "They came up to me afterward and laughed, and then asked, 'When do we
leave?'

   "It became obvious on the tour that women with breast cancer were really fed
up. AIDS activism was going on and they saw that you could make a difference. It
was time to politicize breast cancer."

   She helped launch the National Breast Cancer Coalition, which has been highly
successful in the United States in increasing research funding.

   In 1992, she was recruited to UCLA, where she started a comprehensive breast
care centre.

   She still lives in southern California with her longtime partner, Dr. Helen
Cooksey, and their 8-year-old daughter. Love conceived the child by artificial
insemination and the couple won a legal fight to jointly adopt the child, giving
them shared parental rights. Cooksey gave up her surgery practice to stay home
with the child.

   Last year, Love quit her clinical practice, calling herself burned out. "It
was getting harder and harder," she says. "The difference between you and the
patient becomes less and less."

   She attributes her decision partly to her menopause, a time when women tend
to take stock of their lives.

   For now, she's not taking hormones, but she would if her symptoms got a lot
worse.

   Taking hormones for four to five years to relieve symptoms doesn't appear to
be risky, she says. "I object to the notion of taking them for the rest of your
life. These are not M&Ms. There may be good arguments for women at high risk for
heart disease or osteoporosis, but not everybody needs to be on it."

   Instead, she's exercising more and eating a healthy diet that includes more
soy, which is believed to have beneficial plant estrogens.

   But she's also taking a healthy dollop of her own advice: Not to get crazed
about doing the "right thing" and not to put off having fun. She spends more
time with her family and has decided to count chocolate - it does come from a
bean - as a vegetable.

   "We have to feed our spirits and souls and keep them happy."

   But that's not to say Love is less driven. She's earning her M.B.A. to become
"bilingual" in business and medicine in these days of constant cost-cutting.

   She's also got a $500,000 research grant from the U.S. defence department to
develop an intraductal approach to breast cancer. With a 0.5-mm scope, she's
trying to access the milk ducts through the nipple.

   "Breast cancer starts in the lining of the milk ducts," she explains. "Our
problem has been that we don't have access. With cervical cancer, you can get a
Pap smear. But by the time we see or feel a breast lump, it's been there a long
time.

   "Then it occurred to me that if milk comes out of the nipple, we should be
able to go in."

   One problem, she says, is the inadequate research on breast anatomy, such as
the number of milk ducts or nipple openings. "It never mattered before," says
Love.

   Her deep-felt optimism is infectious. She believes gene therapy and even a
vaccine against breast cancer are possible in the not distant future.

   "We're going to look back at mastectomies, chemotherapy and radiation in
amazement."

GRAPHIC: Star color photo (Lautens): CANCER CRUSADER: Dr. Susan Love has taken
on the medical establishment, saying not enough time has been spent on finding
innovative techniques for earlier breast cancer detection.women; cancer; United;
States; Susan; Love; biography

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 1999


                              92 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1997 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                    March 13, 1997, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A31

LENGTH: 439 words

HEADLINE: Go slow with cloning laws, scientists warn U.S. senators Unduly
restricting inquiry could stifle promising biological research

BYLINE: BY CURT SUPLEE SPECIAL TO THE STAR (WASHINGTON POST)

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   Numerous scientific experts - including the Scottish researcher whose team
was the first to clone an adult mammal - yesterday warned the U.S. Congress
against legislating prematurely on the subject of human cloning, lest a hasty,
ill-drafted law stifle promising biological research.

   Ian Wilmut of the Roslin Institute in Scotland told a crowded Senate hearing
that cloning humans would be "unethical" and "quite inhumane." His group, Wilmut
said, "would welcome any efforts that could be made on an international basis"
to ban the practice before it occurs.

   But he urged that new laws should "preserve opportunities to take advantage"
of advances in gene manipulation, and not "throw out this particular baby with
the bath water" by overreacting to the cloning news.

   Unduly restricting inquiry, Wilmut said before the Senate Labor and Human
Resources subcommittee on public health and safety, could severely hamper
progress toward gene therapies for Parkinson's disease, cystic fibrosis and
other maladies, as well as fundamental discoveries in the way cells specialize.

   Although world opinion has been galvanized by reports of the cloned sheep
named Dolly, "the discussion is actually running ahead of the science," said
Harold E. Varmus, director of the National Institutes of Health.

   The prospect of human cloning is extremely remote at present, Varmus said,
because the techniques used are "extremely difficult, inefficient and not
established in species other than sheep." As a result, "we're not in a moment of
crisis."

   Republican Senator Bill Frist, a transplant surgeon, had convened the hearing
to begin to "explore all of the medical, social and ethical implications" of the
cloning technique.

   Three hours of testimony by 10 witnesses produced considerable unanimity.
Nearly all panel members - including three bioethicists and three
representatives of biotechnology enterprises - concurred that human cloning
would be reprehensible but that exploitation of new gene-manipulation techniques
holds extraordinary promise.

   The principal dissent came from Democrat Senator Tom Harkin, who insisted it
was "utter nonsense" for government to try to regulate scientific inquiry.

   "I don't think there are any appropriate limits to human knowledge - none
whatsoever," Harkin said.

   Republican Senator Christopher S. Bond had previously taken the opposite
position, speaking in favor of a bill that would make permanent President Bill
Clinton's temporary ban on human cloning experiments and federally funded embryo
research. "There are aspects of life," Bond said, "that should be off-limits to
science."


GRAPHIC: PHOTO: IAN WILMUT: "Dolly" creator calls human cloning unethical.

LOAD-DATE: March 14, 1997


                              93 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1997 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                    March 13, 1997, Thursday, METRO EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A31

LENGTH: 442 words

HEADLINE: Go slow with cloning laws, scientists warn U.S. senators Unduly
restricting inquiry could stifle promising biological research

BYLINE: By Curt Suplee SPECIAL TO THE STAR (WASHINGTON POST)

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   WASHINGTON - Numerous scientific experts - including the Scottish researcher
whose team was the first to clone an adult mammal - yesterday warned the U.S.
Congress against legislating prematurely on the subject of human cloning, lest a
hasty, ill-drafted law stifle promising biological research.

   Ian Wilmut of the Roslin Institute in Scotland told a crowded Senate hearing
that cloning humans would be "unethical" and "quite inhumane." His group, Wilmut
said, "would welcome any efforts that could be made on an international basis"
to ban the practice before it occurs.

   But he urged that new laws should "preserve opportunities to take advantage"
of advances in gene manipulation, and not "throw out this particular baby with
the bath water" by overreacting to the cloning news.

   Unduly restricting inquiry, Wilmut said before the Senate Labor and Human
Resources subcommittee on public health and safety, could severely hamper
progress toward gene therapies for Parkinson's disease, cystic fibrosis and
other maladies, as well as fundamental discoveries in the way cells specialize.

   Although world opinion has been galvanized by reports of the cloned sheep
named Dolly, "the discussion is actually running ahead of the science," said
Harold E. Varmus, director of the National Institutes of Health.

   The prospect of human cloning is extremely remote at present, Varmus said,
because the techniques used are "extremely difficult, inefficient and not
established in species other than sheep." As a result, "we're not in a moment of
crisis."

   Republican Senator Bill Frist, a transplant surgeon, had convened the hearing
to begin to "explore all of the medical, social and ethical implications" of the
cloning technique.

   Three hours of testimony by 10 witnesses produced considerable unanimity.
Nearly all panel members - including three bioethicists and three
representatives of biotechnology enterprises - concurred that human cloning
would be reprehensible but that exploitation of new gene-manipulation techniques
holds extraordinary promise.

   The principal dissent came from Democrat Senator Tom Harkin, who insisted it
was "utter nonsense" for government to try to regulate scientific inquiry.

   "I don't think there are any appropriate limits to human knowledge - none
whatsoever," Harkin said.

   Republican Senator Christopher S. Bond had previously taken the opposite
position, speaking in favor of a bill that would make permanent President Bill
Clinton's temporary ban on human cloning experiments and federally funded embryo
research. "There are aspects of life," Bond said, "that should be off-limits to
science."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: IAN WILMUT: "Dolly" creator calls human cloning
unethical.genetics; research; ethics; United; States; animal; biotechnology

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 1999


                              94 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1997 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                    February 21, 1997, Friday, METRO EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. D1

LENGTH: 1072 words

HEADLINE: Fighting Spirit A Georgetwon couple vows to keep life as normal as
possible as their son battles a crippling and terminal disease

BYLINE: By Debra Black Toronto Star

BODY:

   For Kimberley and Wilson Chan, the news was devastating.

   In the fall of 1995, the Georgetown couple had taken their youngest son Ilish
to the doctor for a checkup because he was walking and sitting up at a slightly
slower pace than that of his older brother Aberdeen.

   They thought it was just a developmental thing and that Ilish would catch up
soon enough. Then they heard the doctor's verdict: Ilish had Duchenne muscular
dystrophy, an incurable, progressive disease which causes the body's muscles to
atrophy, eventually leading to death.

   "We were just in shock," recalls Wilson, a 42-year-old warehouse worker at
Molson's. "I went through this period (when) I didn't tell anyone. I just went
to work. I went through a period of being low and withdrawn."

   Kimberley, 29, felt responsible for her son's illness because Duchenne
muscular dystrophy is a genetic disease passed on from mother to son.

   "I felt tremendous guilt," says Kimberley. "I passed this on to him."

   But there had been no need for genetic testing, she explains. "I was young,
healthy. Who knew?"

   About 30 in 100,000 boys in Canada are born with Duchenne muscular dystrophy.

   The Chans face a tough road ahead. Ilish, who is now 3, will develop normally
for the next few years, but by the time he's 10 he will need a scooter or
wheelchair.

   By his early teens, he may need surgical intervention to prevent his
deteriorating spine from collapsing and crushing his heart and lungs, and
eventually he may need a ventilator to help him breathe.

   'I felt tremendous guilt. I passed this (disease) on to him'

   The life expectancy for males with Duchenne muscular dystrophy is the
mid-30s.

   Both parents firmly believe children can still have meaningful lives even
with a crippling and terminal condition.

   Tears come to Kimberley's eyes when she talks about a recent court decision
involving a wrongful birth suit.

   An Ottawa couple were awarded $3 million to raise their two sons, who have
Duchenne muscular dystrophy. They argued that they would have aborted the
children or never conceived them in the first place had their doctors told them
the full implications of the disease.

   But for Kimberley and Wilson, the option of an abortion would not have
crossed their minds, even if they had known that Ilish would be born with the
disease.

   From the moment of the diagnosis, they have spent all their time and energy
putting into place the medical and social resources that Ilish will need as he
ages.

   Kimberley has been a stay-at-home mother since her first son was born. She
has taken Ilish for assessment to Mississauga's Erinoaks, Serving Young People
with Physical Disabilities, which treats about 650 children, 30 of them with
Duchenne muscular dystrophy.

   There she has found not only medical help for Ilish, but also peer support
for herself and the rest of her family.

   The Chans hope to give both their sons a relatively normal life. They try not
to distinguish between the boys.

   Ilish will be able to participate in many childhood activities, attending
school, going on trips, making friends. He'll just be doing it from a wheelchair
or scooter.

   But Aberdeen, the 6-year-old who did not inherit the disease, knows something
is different and wonders why the family spends so much time at a rehab centre.

   For now, the Chans have told him that Ilish needs help because he has very
sore muscles. When he wants more information, they will give it to him,
Kimberley says.

   Aberdeen has accepted that, Kimberley says, and seems to enjoy going to a
special sibling group at their rehab centre so he can practise using a
wheelchair (to see what it's like). But she wonders about the impact when he
understands the full dimensions of the disease.

   'There are exciting advances being made in treatment'

   Ilish doesn't really understand what's happening, but knows when his muscles
hurt or when he can't do something, his mother says, adding he may be 5 or 6
before any real deterioration begins.

   But there is reason for hope. Over the last decade, great strides have been
made in genetic research, beginning with the discovery of the gene that causes
the disease in 1986, says Dr. Ron Worton, director of research at Ottawa General
Hospital and one of the scientists who first identified the gene.

   Researchers and doctors now understand what causes the disease and with that
understanding comes the possibility of a cure and better treatments.

   Boys who have Duchenne muscular dystrophy are missing a protein in their
muscles, Worton says. That protein, called dystrophin, is produced by a healthy
gene in most of us. Its job is to support muscle structure.

   Without this protein to structurally support muscle cells, they rupture or
cave in and eventually atrophy.

   But Worton is optimistic about the possibilities of a cure or effective
treatment for the disease.

   Research teams around the world, including his own, are looking at possible
forms of gene therapy.

   One team at Montreal's Neurological Institute at McGill is looking at using
the cold virus as a way to transplant a good dystrophin gene in muscle cells,
Worton says.

   Meanwhile, Worton and a team of Ottawa researchers are working in conjunction
with Inex Pharmaceuticals Inc., a Vancouver-based firm developed by biochemists
at the University of B.C.

   They hope to use a chemically synthesized mini-cell, or liposome, to deliver
the good dystrophin gene to muscle cells. That gene in turn would produce the
missing dystrophin and help support muscles.

   Dr. Gillian Hogan, medical director at Mississauga's Erinoaks, looks at how
far things have come.

   "There are choices available now for families that weren't available 10 years
ago," observes Hogan. "There is lots we can do now to slow down the progress of
the disease or treat symptoms as they arise."

   These include everything from giving children steroids, which slow down the
progression of the disease, to giving teens ventilators to help them breathe,
Hogan says.

   More options will open up down the road.

   "We don't have a definitive cure, but there are exciting advances being made
in treatment, " she explains. "There are reasons to be more excited about a cure
now that we know what the gene is and what it does. There are real possibilities
for treatment in the future."

   For more information, contact the Muscular Dystrophy Association of Canada at
(416) 488-0030.

GRAPHIC: Star Color Photo (LAUTENS): SUPPORTIVE FAMILY: Wilson and Kimberley
Chan were "in shock" after finding out son Ilish had Duchenne muscular
dystrophy.child; health; research

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 1999


                              95 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1997 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

              February 8, 1997, Saturday, SATURDAY SECOND EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. H4

LENGTH: 254 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy could treat prostate cancer

BYLINE: Reuter

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES

BODY:

   LOS ANGELES (Reuter) - A new highly precise and potent way to target prostate
cancer could lead to a new treatment that is safer and more effective than
chemotherapy, researchers say.

   The treatment would work by injecting genes into the prostate that kill the
cancer cell while sparing the surrounding healthy cells - a method one scientist
likens to a "smart bomb."

   The study of this genetically engineered attack on prostate cancer was
conducted at the University of California.

   "Chemotherapy cannot differentiate between the good and the bad cells," says
Dr. Arie Belldegrum, principal investigator for the study. "We are attempting to
create a smart bomb."

   While the concept of gene therapy to treat cancer is not new, Belldegrum's
team has discovered a delivery system that transports a genetically altered,
cancer-killing gene 1,000 times more effectively than previously known methods.

   Prostate cancer is the most common form of cancer in men. But unlike most
other forms of cancer, it is also the ideal target for gene therapy because it
is almost always associated with a substance in the blood, known as the protein
specific antigen, or PSA.

   All people have PSA genes, but only the presence of prostate cancer activates
them to produce the protein specific antigen. For this reason, doctors can
usually detect prostate cancer with a simple blood test.

   "With colon or breast cancer we don't have such specific markers," says
Belldegrum.United; States; genetics; cancer; research

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 1999


                              96 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1997 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                February 2, 1997, Sunday, SUNDAY SECOND EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. F8

LENGTH: 1130 words

HEADLINE: New gene drug is born after dramatic hitch Molecular biologist saved
cystic fibrosis project by producing a trillion viruses

BYLINE: By Donald Drake Special to The Star

DATELINE: PHILADELPHIA

BODY:

   PHILADELPHIA

   SEVEN WEEKS ago, on Dec. 9, a 19-year-old college student from Burlington,
N.J., named Christopher Manzi became the first volunteer to receive a new gene
drug designed to treat cystic fibrosis (CF).

   It was the start of a toxicity trial for the new drug, which was developed by
Philadelphia's Institute for Human Gene Therapy. Over the next year, 14 more
cystic fibrosis patients are expected to sign up for the trial.

   But less than four months before that, the chances of the trial ever getting
under way had looked extremely bleak.

   At a meeting with colleagues on Aug. 15, institute director James Wilson had
asked how work on the new drug was progressing. He was told the lab was having
trouble making it.

   Trials with CF patients were supposed to start in a month at the University
of Pennsylvania Medical Center. This was the first Wilson had heard that the
drug would not be ready.

   It was devastating news. This not only jeopardized the cystic fibrosis trials
but the development of gene drugs for several other diseases.

   Wilson was stunned and angry. He had overcome other obstacles in his quest
for the drug. Could he surmount this one?

   For eight years - ever since the cystic fibrosis gene was discovered at
Toronto's Hospital for Sick Children by Dr.Lap-Chee Tsui and colleagues -
researchers throughout the world had been conducting human trials trying to
develop the first effective gene drug. Such a breakthrough that could
revolutionize medical care by correcting the genetic defects that cause some
diseases.

   But so far no one had succeeded, as one research problem after another
cropped up in the unexplored territory of gene therapy research.

   By last August, Wilson thought he had solved the most vexing problems
preventing successful therapy. But now production problems were thwarting him.

   At stake was a drug that might prolong or save the lives of patients with
cystic fibrosis, the most common fatal genetic defect. In the United States and
Canada alone, 33,000 people have the lung disease, which kills most victims by
their 30s.

   Wilson had started testing a first-generation CF drug in 1993. But he stopped
the trial in the spring of 1994 when animal studies indicated that the drug
would be toxic at high doses. He decided to wait for a second-generation drug,
on which they were running final tests.

   He had expected to resume the trials within six months, but the
second-generation drug was also abandoned when an even better drug looked
possible.

   Patients were desperate for effective treatment - a gene drug that could
produce the protein they needed to help thin the mucus choking their lungs.

   Wilson blamed himself for underestimating how difficult it was to grow
viruses in the large quantities needed for human trials.

   Armed with the gene that CF patients lack, the viruses (called vectors) are,
in fact, the drug. They deliver the missing CF genes to the patient's lung cells
by infecting them.

   The viruses are grown in cell lines, composed of human cells that have been
engineered to provide special protein the vectors need for growth.

   Scientists needed a million cells to make the billion vectors required for
animal studies. But for human trials, a trillion vectors would be needed.

   Wilson was discovering that it was a lot harder to scale up production than
he had thought.

   A few hours after learning that the CF vector couldn't be made in large
enough quantities, Wilson dropped by the lab bench of Guangping Gao, a 39-
year-old molecular biologist, who was particularly gifted in making cell lines.
He had discovered the cell line for the CF vector but wasn't involved in its
production.

   Wilson asked Gao if he thought he could solve the production problems. Gao
said yes. He was certain of it.

   After talking with Gao about producing the vector, Wilson decided the lab
needed to be restructured. He resolved to hire two more lab technicians,
increase the space 30 per cent, and put the best vector grower he could find in
charge. He picked Guangping Gao.

   The next day, Gao donned a sterile gown, booties and cap and started from
scratch to make the cell line to grow the virus.

   On Day One, he thawed cells stored in a freezer, distributed them among five
covered plates, and waited for the 10 million cells to multiply. On the fourth
day, he distributed the cells that now filled the five plates, to 25 plates.

   He waited another three days and redistributed the cells to 100 plates. By
Day 10, he had a billion cells.

   On Day 11, after the cells had multiplied until they covered precisely 90 per
cent of the surface of each plate, Gao infected them with adenoviruses. It was
essential that the cells covered no more and no less of the dish for the
adenoviruses to grow properly.

   Normally, adenoviruses cause colds. But these had been disabled and armed
with the gene that cystic fibrosis patients lack.

   Gao waited three more days for the viruses to multiply, nourished by the
cells he had so carefully prepared.

   On Sept. 11, Gao was ready to harvest the viruses. All night long, they
viruses had been spinning at 20,000 revolutions per minute as a centrifuge
separated them from broken up bits of cells and other debris.

   Inside the centrifuge, which looked like a top-loading washing machine, were
six plastic tubes, each filled with a whitish fluid and a thin band of bluish
material in the centre. The bands were about as thick as the width of a
matchstick. This was the concentration of viruses the centrifuge had separated
from other material in the tube.

   There would have been no blue line if no virus had been produced or the line
would have been much thinner if only small amounts had been made.

   Using a spectrometer, a device which counts viruses, Gao determined that more
than a trillion viruses had been made - more than enough to restart the human
cystic fibrosis trial.

   One hour later, Gao gave Wilson the printout of all the numbers generated by
the spectrometer.

   "You believe these figures?" Wilson asked. "They're a hundredfold fold more
than they were getting before."

   Gao said he thought that the first attempts had failed because the cells were
either too tightly or loosely packed in the lab dishes when they were infected
with the virus.

   Wilson continued staring at the numbers on the sheet, leaning his chin on his
folded hands. "So we're swimming in the stuff," he said finally, smiling for the
first time. "That's fantastic."

   Gao spent the next four weeks going through the final stages of preparing the
drug for the federal approval needed to resume the trials on volunteers.
Finally, on Oct. 7, the data were sent to the Food and Drug Administration.

   Approval was given 16 days later.

   KNIGHT-RIDDER NEWSPAPERS

GRAPHIC: KRT COLOR PHOTOS: TO THE RESCUE: Institute director James Wilson, left,
called on molecular biologist Guangping Gao, above in blue, to create cell line
that made human trials possible for cystic fibrosis drug.genetics; research;
drug; trade

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 1999


                              97 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1996 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

              December 7, 1996, Saturday, SATURDAY SECOND EDITION

SECTION: INSIGHT; Pg. B1

LENGTH: 1948 words

HEADLINE: Canada's fetal wall A federal bolt from the blue in '88 still thwarts
our pioneering work on a cure for Parkinson's disease

BYLINE: by Lynda Hurst TORONTO STAR

BODY:

   'WE COULD have been leading the world on this, but now we're going nowhere."

   Canada's Dr. Alan Fine, an internationally recognized research scientist, is
explaining why he has given up his ground-breaking work on a cure for
Parkinson's disease.

   "The funding situation is horrific," he says flatly. "The government
continues to show cowardice and blind stupidity. It's appalling."

   The Dalhousie University physiologist and biochemist is referring to the ban
on federal money for research using human fetal cells - tissue obtained from
elective abortions - that came into place in July, 1988.

   That's when, as one government scientist puts it, then health minister Jake
Epp "flippantly" responded to a question in the House of Commons by saying that
as long as he was minister there would be no government funding for this
purpose. "It came out of the blue, so far as we could tell," says one official.
"There had been no policy debate."

   Even the Medical Research Council, the organization that actually dispenses
the funds, was caught off-guard by Epp's remark but forced nonetheless to accede
to it.

   The ban followed on the heels of a similar one enacted earlier that year by
the Reagan government in Washington. On both sides of the border, anti-abortion
activists were jubilant.

   They stopped cheering in the United States in January, 1993, when President
Bill Clinton, on his first day in office, rescinded the moratorium. Since then,
its National Institutes of Health have spent almost $3 million a year on
research programs that transplant fetal brain cells into victims of Parkinson's
disease.

   Ottawa's ban remains in effect to this day.

   It has not halted all work in this country. But it has severely restricted
it. And in so doing, it may mean that Canada loses the 44-year-old Fine
altogether. He's turned down outside job offers in the past, he says, and he may
not do so again.

   "We thought that when the Liberals came in, things would change," he says.
"I've tried. I've had senators and sub-ministers and my own MP try. But they've
all come back saying it's hopeless."

   Fine was the head of a six-man team that began a five-year, fetal-transplant
project at Halifax's Victoria General Hospital in 1991. It was privately funded
at $40,000 a year by the Parkinson Foundation of Canada, a grant that barely
covered the real costs. Three members of the team, including the neurosurgeon,
donated their services, as did the hospital itself.

   The intention was to find out if minute drops of fetal brain tissue inserted
into the brain of an individual would take root and generate the brain chemical
dopamine, which Parkinson's sufferers no longer produce. It is this deficiency
that causes progressive lack of muscle control, tremors, shaking and ultimately,
in many cases, paralysis.

   The project was debated intensively for two years before being given the
green light; the views of all hospital staff were sought, along with the
opinions of members of the community, physicians and ethicists across the
country.

   The hospital concluded that certain guidelines had to be followed. The cells
could come only from dead fetuses that otherwise would be destroyed; the woman
having the abortion had to give her specific consent for the transplant; and
there could be no connection whatsoever between her and the patient receiving
the tissue.

   The identities of the patients and the dates of the operations were kept
secret. This did not stop pro-life extremists from picketing the hospital and
launching a letter-writing assault on its president, comparing the research to
experiments in Nazi death camps and him to Adolf Hitler.

   The project went on, however. In the five patients who were implanted with
fetal cells, there was a significant increase in dopamine activity. The dopamine
levels in Parkinson's sufferers are depleted by 30 to 40 per cent; the
transplants restored 80 per cent of it.

   Improvements in physical function were not as strong, however, stopping after
18 months. "But what we did was set the clock back a few months and in this
condition, that is no small thing," Fine says.

   The research showed that the surgical implant technique was safe but that the
fetal cells, to be more effective, should be transplanted at an earlier stage in
the disease. Phase two of the project is now under way, with 10 patients, less
impaired than the first group, having fetal cells transplanted on both sides of
the brain.

   The funding is now coming from several sources, including some American
biotech companies who know the Halifax project is in the forefront of this type
of neuro-transplant surgery.

   They're aware, too, of the pioneering work Fine was doing in the lab,
developing a technique to keep cells dividing in vitro. That process, along with
genetically engineered cells, could mean that tissue taken directly from fetuses
may not be needed in the future.

   That's what frustrates the project's new director, neurosurgeon Ivar Mendez.
Research on alternative sources of tissue could come to fruition in three or
four years, he says, but right now science still needs the direct product of
abortion.

   "It's a mystery to me why we can't deal with this issue. It means that Canada
is falling behind, and that means we are not serving the 200,000 Canadians who
suffer from this disease."

   Mendez says the British government has poured almost $40 million into a new
brain-regeneration centre at Cambridge University that is researching fetal
transplants for Parkinson's and other neuro-diseases, as well as spinal-cord
injuries. Sweden has opened a similar centre.

   The U.S. is running two experimental programs, with 40 patients each,
compared with Halifax's 10. When the Halifax program is complete, there will be
no human research in Canada whatsoever.

   "You have to have government funding for this kind of work," Mendez says
emphatically. "If we are not supported here, the technological advances will not
be available in Canada. It's as simple as that."

   What exasperates both men is that, although the public knew little about it,
fetal cells have been employed for decades in medical research. They are used in
a variety of vaccines, including measles, rubella and polio, which used fetal
kidney cells. They're also used to diagnose viral diseases, to screen new drug
products for toxicity and to identify carcinogens.

   Until that day in 1988, Canada's Medical Research Council had provided
millions in funding over the proceeding 30 years.

   "It was the issue of transplanting brain cells into humans that caused the
trouble," says Fine. "People seemed to think we were transplanting heads or
something."

   It was a little more than that. Once human transplant technology began to be
developed, many ethicists and physicians said it was crucial to adopt guidelines
in order to prevent making fetuses a commodity or the encouraging of abortion.

   It's why the issue was part of the mandate of the Royal Commission on New
Birth Technologies which, in its report in 1993, concluded that fetal
transplantation was acceptable under controlled conditions.

   The commission recommended that a central organization should license
research projects and that:

   * Specific permission to use the fetus should be obtained from the women
undergoing abortions. * There be no payment. * The method or timing of abortions
not be changed in any way. * Transplants be allowed only for human recipients. *
There be no designation of donor. (This was to forestall anyone deliberately
having an abortion to provide tissue for, say, a relative suffering from
Parkinson's, as rumored to have occurred in the U.S.)

   Dr. Patricia Baird, the Vancouver geneticist who chaired the $28 million
commission, says the guidelines were needed to assuage legitimate concerns about
the free-and-open use of human fetuses.

   They did so, she says, and it is now "uncaring to prohibit research. There is
a real possibility that this work could alleviate suffering."

   The cure for diseases such as Parkinson's probably lies in gene therapy, "but
that is a long-term business. In the interim, there is a need for this work."

   Aside from the Halifax project, no one is doing human transplant research in
Canada. The federal ban has possibly resulted in a clamping down in the private
sector as well as the academic. The commission surveyed all members of the
Canadian Pharmaceutical Association, and not one reported using fetal cells.

   "You can't know exactly what's going on in pharmaceutical or biomed companies
because you can't go in and look around," says Baird. "But we canvassed both
sides, and if companies are using fetal cells, they're not getting them from
Canadian hospitals or clinics."

   That may please the pro-life movement. But it discomfits victims of a variety
of diseases that scientists believe could be more effectively treated, in some
cases cured outright, by fetal transplantation.

   Fetal cells have a marked capacity for growth and tend not to be as often
rejected as adult tissue. Theoretically, they could be used to stimulate the
immune system and treat liver function depleted by anti-cancer therapy. They
could be used in fighting leukemia, aplastic anemia, insulin-dependent diabetes,
and Alzheimer's disease. Spinal-cord research on mice shows nerves and other
connective tissue can be regenerated by transplanted fetal cells.

   U.S. researchers are currently trying to duplicate the recently announced
results of an Indian study which found that an injection of fetal tissue
underneath the human retina may reverse the progression of retinitis pigmentosa,
an incurable eye disease that afflicts more than 1.5 million people worldwide.

   When the Halifax Parkinson's project winds up, Canada will, at best, be
dependent on the largesse of other countries' handouts. Unless Ottawa finally
rescinds the ban.

   "All along, they said they couldn't do that until the royal commission came
down," says Trevor Williams, director of the Parkinson's Foundation. "Well, it's
been down for three years now.

   "We've pleaded with the Medical Research Council and been told they can't
supersede the minister. We've asked (health minister) David Dingwall, and always
been told officials are 'looking into it.' The work on Parkinson's will take
another 10 years, and it's being hindered by the ban. It should be lifted."

   Phyllis Colvin, director of health policy at Health Canada, says the issue of
fetal transplants is slated to be addressed after Bill C-47, dealing with
prohibited birth technologies and facing third and final reading in the Commons,
is passed early next year.

   Legislation on a regulation regime, as recommended by the royal commission,
is now in the discussion stage and is expected to go through parliament as an
amendment to C-47.

   Will it result in a rescinding of the ban? "The funding element will be dealt
with," is all Colvin will say.

   The department recognizes that there are a number of diseases dependent on
fetal-tissue research, she adds. "But we also recognize that there are
considerations on the sourcing of it. There have to be protections in place in
order for it to be used in appropriate treatments."

   Dr. Francis Rolleston, a director of the Medical Research Council, says the
day that the ban is taken off is the day the council will start accepting
applications for fetal cell research.

   Alan Fine will wait and see - but not with bated breath. It may be too late
for Canada to get back on track.

   "This research has suffered severely and possibly irrevocably from the
politically motivated and irresponsible unwillingness of government to support
it."

GRAPHIC: Star color drawing (RAFFI ANDERIAN) Maple Leaf blocks upward progress
of medical researcher.  photo (ANDREW VAUGHAN FOR THE TORONTO STAR) ANGRY
RESEARCHER: Dr. Alan Fine says the federal government continues to show
'cowardice and blind stupidity' with its failure to renew funding for
fetal-tissue research.

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 1999


                              98 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1996 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                   December 4, 1996, Wednesday, METRO EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A4

LENGTH: 383 words

HEADLINE: Sick Kids experts find a super blood cell Genetic cures, improved
cancer treatment likely

BYLINE: by Joseph Hall TORONTO STAR

BODY:

   Researchers at Toronto's Hospital for Sick Children have discovered what is
likely the "mother of all" human blood cells, a study published in the leading
science journal Nature Medicine shows.

   The discovery of what is called a stem cell could lead to vastly improved
cancer treatments and genetic ways to cure several common blood illnesses, says
Sick Kids geneticist John Dick, who led the study.

   The stem cell can produce all the blood cells found in the pyramid below it,
says Dick, also a professor at the University of Toronto.

   These stem cells, of which each person may have only 10,000, reside in the
bone marrow and produce the billions of red, white, platelet and immune cells
that make up human blood.

   "So there are a lot of reasons we want to understand that cell, understand
what it looks like and manipulate it," Dick said.

   "But up until now that's been difficult in many ways, because we haven't had
a way to see that cell, to see its activity and what it does."

   The problem has been the inability of scientists to distinguish between stem
cells and other, more specialized marrow cells that are farther up the long
blood creation chain.

   "If you look under a microscope, all those cells look the same," Dick said.

   Using mice bred to lack immune systems, Sick Kids researchers were able to
test the blood-creating potential of the various marrow cells, which had been
separated according to different markers on their outer walls.

   "What we found was there was only one stem cell in each million bone marrow
cells and we found a way to fish out that cell . . . or pretty close to that
cell," Dick said.

   The discovery has the potential to greatly improve treatment for all kinds of
cancerous tumors by allowing more effective post-chemotherapy marrow
transplants.

   Dick says his discovery could allow physicians to fish out blood-growing
stems from a person's marrow and re-introduce these alone after chemotherapy has
knocked out the main tumors and the other marrow cells.

   He says the stems have proven to be the only cells that can carry genetic
information up to the finished blood products, making them the only ones doctors
could effectively target for gene therapy to treat such ailments as sickle cell
anemia, thalassemia and leukemia.

GRAPHIC: photo: John Dick

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 1999


                              99 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1996 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

              November 9, 1996, Saturday, SATURDAY SECOND EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A2

LENGTH: 346 words

HEADLINE: Toronto woman first to receive cold virus cancer treatment

BYLINE: By Joseph Hall TORONTO STAR

BODY:

   Joyce McCaffery is using a combination of the common cold and courage in her
13-year-old fight against breast cancer.

   And the outcome of her innovative battle could change the way millions of
people around the world attack the disease and other types of malignant tumors.

   "Why would I be afraid, I have nothing to lose," says the 68-year-old Toronto
grandmother, who is the first person in the world to receive a new cancer
treatment that uses the cold virus as a delivery system.

   "I've been given a death sentence and this could reverse it."

   Using a genetically altered form of the adenovirus - which has caused minor
misery for millions of people on earth - doctors at Toronto Hospital are for the
first time delivering an immune system gene into the tumors of 30 breast and
skin cancer patients.

   "This is a new approach to treating cancer . . . using a cold virus to
deliver genes to cancer cells," says Dr. Keith Stewart, director of cancer gene
therapy at the hospital's General Division.

   "What we've done is removed part of the virus and replaced it with the
interleukin-2 gene."

   Interleukin-2 causes the body to produce T-cells, which are one of our main
defences against foreign substances and diseases, including cancer.

   But up until now, doctors have been unable to introduce successfully the
natural human protein into tumors at high enough levels or for long enough
periods to be effective, Stewart says.

   "The adenovirus, however, can infect cancer cells quite efficiently," he
says.

   "So if we inject the adenovirus directly into a tumor it will infect the
cancer cells and will start to make interleukin-2 into the tumor."

   Once in the tumor, the added gene begins to produce interleukin-2, which
recognizes the cancer cells as foreign and starts the process that will reject
them.

   "When they've done this with mice you can actually cure the mice of breast
cancer," Stewart says.

   "In humans, of course, we don't know what will happen yet because we haven't
tried this, but we hope we would see at least some responses."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Joyce McCaffery

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 1999


                              100 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1996 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

              November 2, 1996, Saturday, SATURDAY SECOND EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A2

LENGTH: 937 words

HEADLINE: Asian, Canadian scientists try to solve cancer riddle Study of Chinese
who migrated to Canada might unlock mysteries

BYLINE: By Paul Watson TORONTO STAR

DATELINE: HONG KONG

BODY:

   HONG KONG - As almost 300,000 Chinese immigrants pulled up roots and moved to
Canada during the past 15 years, they posed an intriguing riddle to medical
scientists.

   The immigrants left a land where cancer attacked many people at the back of
the throat or in the liver and they resettled in a country where those cancers
are rare.

   The strange thing is their risk of contracting cancers common in China
suddenly dropped once they moved to Canada.

   Now scientists on opposite sides of the planet are co-operating to learn how
the environment might play an important role in cancers with genetic links.

   Just as migration set up the mystery, closer ties between Canada, Hong Kong,
and China gave birth to the scientific collaboration that may help solve it.

   Dr. Kenneth Pritzker, chief pathologist at Toronto's Mount Sinai Hospital,
started the Pacific Bridge Project with a visit to Hong Kong and China in 1992.

   By setting up a new Pacific Bridge Project Foundation, he hopes to raise half
the $5.5 million he needs from private donors here and the rest in Canada. The
money would fund the research for the next three years.

   Superstar actor Jackie Chan is joining Mount Sinai's fundraising campaign
with a visit to Toronto around mid-November when he plans to raise donations by
signing autographs.

   By studying the way cancer attacks Chinese people in their homeland and
Canada, Pritzker's team may help map the most promising route to a cure for one
of humanity's most feared diseases.

   "This project works because of the magic of the relationships here," said
Nicholas Offord, co- president of the Mount Sinai Hospital foundation.

   Pritzker points out that more than 350,000 people of Chinese descent live in
the Greater Toronto Area, many of whom settled there in the past two decades,
and the sudden shift is ideal for research.

   "The very unique feature of this study is that there are two populations of
Chinese in which comparative studies can be made," he said in an interview here.

   "What we're looking at is why one person who has the same diet as another is
more susceptible (to certain cancers)."

   Probing the connection between cancer and genes is one of the most important
strategies in the scientific assault on the disease, partly because quick
detection helps doctors cure it.

   Pritzker's project may even help researchers develop a vaccine against
specific cancers, although it's far too early to tell whether that will ever be
possible, he cautioned.

   Offord adds: "There are definitely people out there who think that you can
have a vaccine that will stop you from getting certain cancers.

   "There are also people who think that by boosting your immune system, you can
prevent cancers. And there are people who believe you can mutate the gene
through 'gene therapy.' "

   In Hong Kong, cancers that attack the liver and the junction of the nasal
passage and pharynx are the second and fifth worst types of the disease, says
Hong Kong's Dr. Luk Shing- chark, chief pathologist at Baptist University
Hospital and a project member.

   Yet both liver and naso-pharyngeal cancers account for less than 1 per cent
of cancers in Canada and are uncommon even among Chinese immigrants genetically
susceptible to them, Pritzker said in Hong Kong.

   "We know that (they) are much more common here than in Canada and we think
that the distribution of genetic susceptibility is likely the same," he added.

   "So there is likely an environmental factor here that is not present in
Canada."

   Lung cancer tops the list in Hong Kong and China, largely because so many
people are heavy smokers, he added.

   Cancers of the breast, colon, prostate and others that have ravaged Western
societies, but traditionally caused far less damage in the Far East, are now on
the rise here.

   A leading theory suggests that may have much to do with changing diet as
economic growth puts more money in people's pockets and they develop a taste for
Western-style foods.

   Pritzker's team is focusing on various viruses linked to cancer, he said.

   Chief among them are the hepatitis virus and the Epstein- Barr Virus, the
main suspect in the so-called Yuppie Flu, which leaves sufferers constantly
exhausted.

   What doesn't make sense to researchers yet is that people are commonly
exposed to both viruses in China, but the cancers that follow are less common.

   "Almost everybody in this part of the world would have been exposed to
Epstein-Barr Virus," Pritzker said. "But a very small percentage of them
actually get the disease.

   "So the question is whether it's related to a particular strain of the virus
or is it the genetic susceptibility to this virus?"

   A possible explanation is that some people's immune systems may simply be
better tuned to fighting off certain cancers, Pritzker said.

   "We in North America may get the same viral infection, but we have a very
much lower risk of getting cancer of the liver following that," he said.

   "We don't know what it is that suppresses the immune system or allows the
cancers to grow in the Chinese populations, if the immune system is indeed a
component."

   If his team finds enough answers, he hopes they will improve cancer treatment
for millions of people and prompt governments to help fund public health
projects.

   "Cancer is as much a public health problem as diarrhea, basically," Pritzker
said. "That's the very blunt way of putting it.

   "There were many things that required more immediate attention a generation
ago. That's one of the triumphs of public health, that we can turn our attention
to these other problems now."

GRAPHIC: STAR PHOTO (Watson): BILATERAL EFFORT: From left, Dr. Faith Chi Suk Ho,
Dr. Kenneth Pritzker and Dr. Luk Shing-chark are members of the Pacific Bridge
Project,

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 1999


                              101 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1996 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                   October 10, 1996, Thursday, METRO EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A11

LENGTH: 720 words

HEADLINE: Premature babies' lease on life gets lift with hospital research Sick
Kids given $2 million to study problems of early birth

BYLINE: By Joseph Hall TORONTO STAR

BODY:

   Her baby blue eyes should not have even seen this world until Christmas.

   Born almost four months premature, Janelle Boyce has spent her first five
weeks of life in a Plexiglas womb, an incubator that has warmed and fed her tiny
body and breathed her very breath.

   But Janelle's future, and the future of premature babies like her, is looking
a lot brighter today with the creation of a new Hospital for Sick Children
research chair to study the serious problems that come with such early births.

   "Janelle is really a tribute to everything that's happened in this field in
the last 20 years," said Dr. Keith Tanswell, who was named yesterday as the
first holder of the Women's Auxiliary of the Hospital for Sick
Children/University of Toronto Chair in Neonatology.

   "Twenty years ago children of her size really didn't survive and now that 80
per cent of them do survive we're looking for ways to improve the quality of
their lives."

   The $2 million research post, which will come under the auspices of the U of
T, will fund Tanswell and its future holders in research surrounding the growth
and development of the smallest and most vulnerable members of society.

   Tanswell's own studies focus on the genetics of prenatal lung growth.

   The lungs, which must be driven to breathe by respirators in children born so
young and weak, are - along with the brain - the organs most vulnerable to
injury in premature babies.

   "In the past we would have destroyed her lungs completely in the length of
time it's taken to keep Janelle alive," Tanswell said, as the baby's parents,
Judy and Wendell, looked on anxiously.

   "But despite the quality of our ventilators these days we still have major
problems with lung injury and any baby that needs to be on for several weeks,
maybe 12, 14 or 16 weeks even, is going to have damaged lungs potentially."

   Tanswell says a combination of improper oxygen levels and excessive pressure
from the ventilators can change the genes that drive lung development during a
natural gestation.

   "The trauma and the high oxygen concentrations that we have to use change the
expression of the genes within the lung," he said.

   "And having the normal organ growth for any of the organs depends on having a
balance of the expression of those genes and it's that balance that becomes
perturbed."

   With premature babies on incubators, the genes that drive the creation of
scar tissue in the lungs are overactive, Tanswell says.

   His research is looking at ways to inject properly functioning genes into the
infants so that those scar tissue genes could be neutralized.

   "There are dozens of different cell types in the lungs and they are all very
tightly regulated (by genes) so their numbers are balanced between them.

   "And it's this balance that is deregulated that allows the cells that cause
scarring to proliferate and increase in number and be over-represented and these
lay down scar tissue."

   In animal trials now, Tanswell's method introduces the corrected lung genes
into the organ in a fatty solution.

   This fatty material adheres to the lung cells and allows the new genetic
material to pass within the cell walls and proceed to create the needed, proper
proteins.

   "I've spent nearly 20 years looking at the causes of chronic lung injury and
what the genes are that cause chronic lung injuries," Tanswell said.

   "What I need to do now is develop the kinds of tools we need to deliver the (
gene) therapy."

   The new chair comes courtesy of the 250 green-smocked women who make up the
hospital's Women's Auxiliary.

   Armed with the stuffed toys and babies' clothing they sell in their hospital
gift shop, the auxiliary women raised the money to endow the chair, the first
ever created by Sick Kids.

   "Anyone who stands beside one of those incubators with the mother of one of
those children would want to help," said auxiliary president Anne MacInnis,
whose hospital cares for about 500 premature babies a year in its neonatal
intensive care unit.

   "We really wanted to help these children and their parents have a chance."

   Tanswell says Janelle appears to have escaped any of the damage premature
babies can be prone to.

   And for her mother, Tanswell's work is nothing short of miraculous.

   "Janelle wouldn't be here without this," she said.

GRAPHIC: Star color photo (Eglinton) BABY STUDIES: Dr. Keith Tanswell, with baby
Janelle Boyce, is first head of research at the Hospital for Sick Children into
premature infants' problems.

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 1999


                              102 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1996 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

               September 22, 1996, Sunday, SUNDAY SECOND EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. B8

LENGTH: 715 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy a ray of hope in cancer war

BYLINE: By Jay Ingram

BODY:

   The September issue of Scientific American magazine is devoted to cancer. The
editors lead the issue off with what they call "guarded optimism" by pointing
out that the death rate for many cancers has declined over the last 20 years.

   While that is true, death rates for many others have risen, with an
especially dramatic rise in deaths from lung cancer in females. The magazine
left me feeling much the same as I did nearly 15 years ago after we did a major
series on cancer on CBC-Radio's Quirks and Quarks: if there's a war on cancer,
one would have to have plenty of plain old unguarded optimism to claim we're on
our way to victory.

   However, even with that pessimistic mindset I was intrigued by the results of
a new study using gene therapy to treat lung cancer. It represents, I think, a
ray of real hope for a novel kind of treatment.

   Gene therapy for cancer tries to address the problem of tumors arising
because they contain faulty genes. There are several mutant genes that have been
implicated in a variety of tumors, but one of the most important is a gene
called p53.

   In normal cells, p53 helps keep the cell's genetic material in good working
order. If there are breaks in the DNA double helix, p53 switches on and
initiates DNA repair. If things get out of hand and repair isn't possible, p53
triggers the death of the cell. If such genetic problems go unrepaired, abnormal
cell growth - tumors - result.

   That is exactly what happens when mutant or nonfunctional versions of p53
arise. The statistics tell the story. At least half of all malignant tumors
contain cells with problems in their p53 genes. This includes 80 per cent of
colon cancers, 50 per cent of lung cancers, and 40 per cent of breast cancers.

   In a small-scale trial reported in this month's Nature Medicine, a team at
the University of Texas treated nine lung cancer patients who had failed all
conventional treatment. All had multiple tumors, some of which had metastasized
to other organs, such as the brain. The gene therapy consisted of injecting good
copies of p53 into selected tumor sites.

   The technology of delivering genes to tumors is amazing. The genes are placed
inside inactivated viruses, tens of millions of viruses per millilitre are
injected into the tumor, and some of them invade cancer cells and presumably
integrate their genetic package - including the "good" p53 - into those cells.

   In the Texas trial, two of the patients either couldn't complete the trial or
died before its completion. In three of the remaining seven, the tumor treated
with gene therapy actually shrank. In three others, the tumor, while not
shrinking, showed no signs of growth. One patient showed complete regression of
the tumor. Programmed cell death inside the tumor, a process known to be
initiated by active p53 genes, was seen in six of the patients.

   Remember, these were patients for whom conventional cancer therapy held no
hope. In fact, many of them died within months of the trial from the growth of
other tumors that had not been targeted by the gene therapy.

   Is this a great breakthrough? It is just too soon to know. After all, this
was just a handful of patients. No one knows how larger groups will respond. No
one knows if future patients can actually be saved from their cancer by this
therapy.

   Although it appears by the reactions of the tumors that p53 genes were
successfully incorporated into malignant cells, the researchers had difficulty
proving with biochemical probes that had indeed happened. And if it did, would
those replacement p53 genes be stable in the ensuing months and years, or would
they too be susceptible to mutation?

   Obviously these and other questions will be answered as more trials are
performed. It might just be the caution I seem to have acquired after years of
reporting on advances in cancer treatment but I still can't forget how, in 1980,
interferon was going to be the great new weapon against cancer. It made the
cover of Time magazine that year but never made the grade as a therapy.

   I'm not betting against p53 or any other gene therapy for cancer. I am
betting that there will be innumerable roadblocks and complications along the
way.

   Jay Ingram hosts the TV program @ discovery.ca on the Discovery Channel.

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 1999


                              103 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1996 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                     August 23, 1996, Friday, METRO EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A2

LENGTH: 507 words

HEADLINE: Toronto pair finds gene blamed for colon cancer Husband, wife at Sick
Kids lead team of scientists from 2 hospitals

BYLINE: by Joseph Hall TORONTO STAR

BODY:

   A husband-and-wife team of researchers at Toronto's Hospital for Sick
Children has discovered a gene responsible for the development of some colon
cancers, the third-leading cause of death from the disease in Canada.

   Research biologists Liliana Attisano and Jeff Wrana led a team of Sick Kids
and Mount Sinai Hospital scientists in the study, which will be published in
today's issue of the medical journal Cell.

   "The ultimate thing that it does is stop the cell from proliferating," Wrana
said of the gene. "It's part of a braking system for the cell, and when it's
broken the brakes don't work."

   Known as MADR2, the gene initiates the third act in a four-part biochemical
system that stops colon cells from wildly proliferating into tumors.

   The first step is the introduction of a growth protein known as Transforming
Growth Factor beta, which slows cell proliferation in normal colon tissue.

   This growth factor attaches itself to receptors on the outside of the cell,
the second step in the process. Step three sees MADR2 produce a protein within
the cell that takes the signal initiated by the growth factor to the nucleus
where the actual brakes are applied.

   "If you wanted an analogy, it would be like a brake system where this (growth
factor) is your foot, the receptor in the brake pedal, the MADR2 is the brake
line and the actual stopping mechanism is in the nucleus," Wrana said.

   "So it's like cutting the brake line if the MADR2 isn't functioning
properly."

   MADR2 stands for Mothers Against dpp Related - a bit of medical humor derived
from the maternal effects the gene exhibited in fruit flies where it was first
seen. The growth factor in fruit flies is known as dpp.

   Although colon cancer is not normally a childhood disease, the Sick Kids team
was working on MADR2 because it is also involved in the normal course of
prenatal cell growth.

   "It was a gene that we were actually looking at that was involved in early
developmental patterning of the early embryo," Wrana said.

   "So we were actually interested in this development when we identified this
gene, but when we did the genetic mapping it mapped to a (chromosome) region
that's been known to be involved in human tumors."

   After mapping it to a segment of chromosome 18 that was involved in other
human malignancies, the Sick Kids team began a collaboration with Mount Sinai
researchers and a connection with colon cancer was established.

   "It's sort of a developing theme that the molecules that are involved in
controlling development are also the same molecules that can lead to the
formation of tumors later on in life," Wrana said.

   There are about 16,300 cases of colon cancer each year in Canada and more
than 6,200 people are expected to die from the disease.

   While Wrana and Attisano don't know what percentage of these deaths are due
to the MADR2 mutation, they say the discovery does give hope of future gene
therapies.

   "Our next goal is to find some way to allow this mutant protein to function,"
Attisano said.

GRAPHIC: Star photo (BORIS SPREMO) CANCER PROBE: Biologists Liliana Attisano and
husband Jeff Wrana work in a laboratory at the Hospital for Sick Children
yesterday. Their studies pinpoint the gene responsible for some colon cancers.

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 1999


                              104 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1996 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                 August 11, 1996, Sunday, SUNDAY SECOND EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A2

LENGTH: 1572 words

HEADLINE: Futuristic gene therapy gives patients new hope

BYLINE: by Donald Drake (Philadelphia Inquirer) Special to the Star

BODY:

   Wearing a black cap to cover the scar from the brain surgery, Joseph Hilly
looked bewildered by the devastating information the doctors were giving him.

   Last May, four months after his surgery to remove a brain tumor, tests showed
there was still cancer and it was growing rapidly. Soon the tumor would grow
back so large it would crush vital brain centres.

   More surgery was needed. He also needed treatment with drugs or with seeds of
radioactive material implanted in his brain. But none of this would be very
effective, doctors said.

   There was one other possibility for the 59-year-old Lansdowne, Pa. man. He
could volunteer for a gene therapy experiment with a drug that had never been
used on brain cancer patients.

   A gentle man with a graying moustache, Hilly was sitting in the corner of a
small, windowless room in the University of Pennsylvania Medical Centre in
Philadelphia with a neurologist, cancer specialist, gene therapy researcher and
bioethicist.

   Hilly discovered he had a brain tumor when he started talking gibberish
during a Florida vacation. Back at the medical centre, he was diagnosed as
having a glioma, a type of cancer that strikes 12,000 people each year in the
United States. Hilly underwent surgery a month later.

   Now, he was stunned by what the doctors were telling him. Many scientists
think gene therapy will revolutionize the way disease is treated.

   Since the first human gene therapy treatment in 1990 for a rare, inherited
immune disorder, medical centres throughout the world have started trials
against dozens of diseases.

   Hilly left the meeting with a seven-page, informed-consent form, which
described in detail the procedure, and went home to talk with relatives and
friends about what to do.

   For 18 years, Hilly, who has never married, had worked as an electrician at
the medical centre, and knew the doctors there were doing many highly
experimental medical procedures. But he hadn't appreciated how far-out the work
was.

   Even by the medical centre's standards, the gene therapy trial seemed
futuristic, almost more science fiction than science fact.

   What the scientists intended to do was change the genetic machinery of the
cancer cells in Hilly's brain and force them to commit suicide.

   They hoped to do this by first infecting the cancer cells with "suicide
genes," delivered to them by adenoviruses. Normally adenoviruses cause colds,
but these viruses, called "vectors," have been disabled and packed with suicide
genes. The genes force cells to make an enzyme called thymidine kinase.

   A few days after giving Hilly the suicide genes, the researchers would give
him a drug called ganciclovir, which thymidine kinase turns into a poison that
cripples the cell's genetic machinery.

   The trial would not be easy. Hilly would be in hospital for three weeks,
undergo surgery twice and be poked, measured and imaged innumerable times.
Finally, he would have to agree to give his brain to the scientists after he
died - or, as the form tactfully put it, "in the eventual occurrence of your
death" - so the therapy's effect on the tissue could be evaluated.

   Most of Hilly's friends advised him to volunteer. After working at the
medical centre all these years, Hilly thought it was a "nut house," but he had
confidence in the doctors.

   "I would like to stick around for a while," he said.

   Five days after the meeting in the little, windowless room, Hilly volunteered
for the trial.

   The primary goal of the two-year study involving 24 patients, is to find out
how much genetically altered adenovirus can be given without harm. The first
group of three patients will get 100 million viruses; the last three 100
billion, or 1,000 times more.

   Never before had adenoviruses been injected into human brains, though other
Pennsylvania medical centre scientists have used them on patients with
mesothelioma, a rare form of cancer that strikes the sac that encloses the
lungs.

   With 11 mesothelioma patients treated so far, adenoviruses appear safe, even
at doses 1,000 times stronger than the glioma patients will start at.

   There's no evidence the therapy has shrunk any tumors, but, with the
exception of one patient, there's also no evidence the mesothelioma is growing.

   Shortly before dawn July 15, Hilly arrived at the medical centre for the
first of the two operations he would undergo as part of the trial, a joint
effort of the centre's Institute for Human Gene Therapy, the University of
Pennsylvania Cancer Centre and the Albert R. Taxin Brain Tumor Research Centre
of the Wistar Institute.

   Hilly was the second patient. The first, a 61-year-old farmer from central
Pennsylvania, underwent surgery two weeks after Hilly's May meeting. He is doing
well.

   During surgery, the vector would be injected into five areas of Hilly's
tumor, the size and shape of a man's thumb. It was located just above and behind
Hilly's left ear, in the temporal lobe, which controls speech. Surprisingly,
Hilly's speech had not been hurt.

   Hilly was subdued but in good humor as he was wheeled to the operating room.
"The doctors in this place are really good," he said.

   A frame was attached to Hilly's head and a CAT scan was taken of his brain.
By orienting the tumor to the frame with the CAT scans, the tumor could be
precisely located, enabling neurosurgeon Kevin Judy to deliver the adenovirus to
the cancer without injecting and damaging healthy tissue.

   It was a tedious process getting the vectors into the tumor.

   Judy finished at noon and Hilly was taken to the facility's clinical research
centre.

   After waiting two days to give the vectors time to make thymidine kinase,
Jane Alavi, one of the study's principal investigators, started injecting the
ganciclovir into Hilly's brain through a vein in his arm.

   It was hoped the drug would go to genetically altered cancer cells and force
them to make thymidine kinase, a suicide potion.

   Everyone was careful not to suggest the therapy would benefit him, but Hilly
was convinced there was a good chance.

   He was frank, saying he wasn't doing this to benefit others, but because it
was his only chance for survival.

   "I'm here for me," he said, "though it would be nice if humanity also
benefited."

   Hilly's faith in the medical and nursing staff grew during his hospital stay
and with it hope that the treatment would help.

   "I'm more and more impressed by this whole operation," he said, during his
third day in the research centre.

   Bioethicists are concerned that the desperation of people with fatal illness
may drive them to participate in research studies and make it difficult for them
to accurately balance risks and benefits.

   To assess this, Pamela Sankar at the Centre for Bioethics at Pennsylvania is
observing and interviewing all volunteers for the brain cancer study.

   On July 22, one week after receiving the first treatment, Hilly was back in
the operating room, this time to have the tumor removed and get another dose of
adenovirus.

   It took Judy almost an hour to prepare Hilly, make his way through the skull
and the dura mater, the tough, fibrous membrane that covers the brain, and reach
the tumor, which was a little more than an 2.5 centimetres below the surface.

   It took less than 30 minutes to cut the tumor free from the surrounding brain
tissue. Most of it was taken to a laboratory for analysis. The rest went to the
Institute for Human Gene Therapy, to determine whether the vector had deposited
the suicide genes.

   Judy left cancer cells behind, but to get them he would also have had to
remove healthy brain tissue and run the risk of impairing Hilly's speech or
interfering with vital functions. It's because of these cells that tumors
invariably return, but the researchers are hoping gene therapy will kill them.

   Hilly was then taken back to the clinical research centre, for a two-week
stay, receiving twice-a-day infusions of ganciclovir. The staff monitored him
for fever, visual changes, weakness or loss of coordination - signs that either
the vector or the surgery had caused an inflammation of healthy brain tissue,
the biggest danger of therapy.

   He left hospital the first week in August, but will receive monthly brain
scans to see if the therapy has stopped the cancer from growing.

   Untreated, gliomas kill within three to six months. Radiation and surgery,
Judy said, doubles survival time but even patients receiving the best care
usually die within a year of diagnosis.

   The brain cancer grows so fast that by the third month the tumor can be large
enough to be detected with MRI scans.

   Stephen Eck, one of the study's two principle investigators, and Judy said if
they still see no evidence of the tumor by the sixth month, they will begin to
think the therapy may be working.

   Examination of the tumor recovered from the first patient showed part of it
had been killed, possibly by the treatment. The man's immune system was reacting
to the vectors. Eck said he didn't know if this meant the treatment was working
or if the immune system was attacking the cancer.

   To see what effect, if any, gene therapy has had on the cancer cells,
patients and the tissue taken from them will be subjected to a battery of tests.

   But the ultimate proof of success will be whether Hilly and other volunteers
are alive six months after treatment. If many are, it could be the start of a
new era in the cancer treatment.

GRAPHIC: KRT photo: MEDICAL MISSION: Joseph Hilly of Pennsylvania is readied for
an injection of a 'suicide' virus that may halt the cancerous brain tumor that
threatens his life. Hilly volunteered for the procedure.

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 1999


                              105 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1996 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                     May 30, 1996, Thursday, METRO EDITION

SECTION: FEATURE; Pg. G14

LENGTH: 620 words

HEADLINE: 'Magic wand' helps to zap tumors This experimental device is guiding
neurosurgeons in delicate brain surgery

BYLINE: By Lillian Newbery SPECIAL TO THE STAR

BODY:

   Neurosurgeons at the Hospital for Sick Children are finding their way through
children's brains with an experimental new helper - "the magic wand."

   In surgery, to remove brain tumors - the leading cancer in children after
leukemia - the wand has been used more often at Sick Kids than at any other
medical centre.

   As the device is inserted into the brain it can be seen on a computer screen,
imposed on to a map of the child's brain made previously from computerized
tomography (CT) scans or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).

   In the past, neurosurgeons relied on their knowledge of the anatomy of the
brain, a delicate structure where the difference of a millimetre can lead to
paralysis or other damage. With the wand, they choose the best path to a tumor.

   Of all the surgical subspecialties, neurosurgery has driven ahead fastest in
the last decade, according to Dr. James Rutka, director of the Brain Tumor
Research Laboratory. Laser beams remove tumors in bloodless fashion and the
Cavitron, an ultrasound aspirator that uses sound waves to pulverize tumors and
suck them away, spares blood vessels.

   About half of brain tumors in children are benign, although potentially fatal
if untreated. More than 70 per cent of children diagnosed with malignant primary
tumors will die of the disease.

   Medullablastoma, formerly almost always a fatal tumor, now has a survival
rate of 70 per cent, making it one of the success stories of childhood cancer,
Rutka says. Medullablastoma peaks at age 4 to 6 and again at 12.

   On the other hand, 60 to 70 per cent of children with malignant astrocytomas
will die of the disease.

   "Just as with leukemia and other forms of cancer, research in brain tumors
remains essential and needs to continue to be funded so we can save these
children," says Rutka.

   Scott West of Burlington was treated five years ago - before the advent of
the wand - for a benign brain tumor.

   "Now he's running around, completely normal with an excellent prognosis,"
says Rutka.

   Because the tumor was benign, Scott didn't have to go through post-operative
radiation or chemotherapy and was home after three weeks of physiotherapy.

   Today he's a "happy, healthy, crazy kid, always with a question," says his
mother, Pam.

   "Like any other 10-year-old, he loves Sega games. He's just started into
baseball for the third year and he's teaching himself to play the keyboard."

   Researchers are looking at the genetics of brain tumors, Rutka says. "We have
had children within the first days or weeks of life who are found to have brain
tumors and there are even reports of such tumors in utero. This may not mean the
father or mother passed it on, but does suggest genetic factors are at work."

   While only 3 to 5 per cent of brain tumors are thought to run in families,
scientists at Sick Kids are studying other genetic involvement.

   "We're looking at genes involved in the cancer process, specifically related
to how fast tumors grow, and genes that might slow down growth."

   In treatment, a novel trial using gene therapy after brain surgery is under
way at the Toronto Hospital, in co-operation with Sick Kids. A virus containing
a gene which selectively targets rapidly growing cells such as tumor cells is
inserted into target cells in the brain. It is only taken up by cells rapidly
dividing. Once the virus gets into the target cell a drug called gangciclovir is
used to kill any cell that takes up the virus.

   The treatment has not yet been used in children, because the team wants to
determine its safety and effect in adults first.

   Gene therapy is exciting, says Scott's mother, Pam West. "Just knowing
research like that is going on is terribly encouraging."

GRAPHIC: Star photo (Power) SCOTT WEST: The 10-year-old was treated five years
ago for a benign brain tumor before the advent of the wand. Brain tumors are the
leading cancer in children, after leukemia.

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 1999


                              106 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1996 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                     May 1, 1996, Wednesday, METRO EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A25

LENGTH: 183 words

HEADLINE: Study uses gene therapy to treat brain tumors

BYLINE: By Leslie Papp TORONTO STAR

BODY:

   For the first time in Canada, gene therapy has been used to treat recurring
brain tumors.

   It's being done as part of an international study with doctors hoping
injections of genetically engineered cancer cells can defeat a type of highly
malignant tumor that spreads tentacles of cancer deep into a patient's brain.

   "We're looking for new therapies," says Dr. Mark Bernstein, head of
neurosurgery at The Toronto Hospital. "This is a very difficult disease."

   The fatal cancer targeted in the study is called glioblastoma and is
characterized by tumor that always recurs after surgery. Average survival time
is 15 months.

   Experimental gene therapy was given in mid-February to the first of 10
patients at the hospital expected to get a novel genetic treatment. And a second
patient underwent the procedure last Thursday.

   Bernstein said the first patient to get the new therapy had already had two
brain operations, radiation and chemotherapy, with the cancer always returning.

   The two-year study is a European and Canadian effort funded by Sandoz, the
drug's manufacturer.

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 1999


                              107 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1996 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

               April 13, 1996, Saturday, SATURDAY SECOND EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. J6

LENGTH: 334 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy may hold brain tumor cells in 'suspended animation'

BYLINE: By Laura Beil Special to the Star

BODY:

   Malignant brain tumors often behave like campfires - they may seem easy to
snuff out, but they can rise up in an instant from just a few stray coals.

   This is why Dallas researchers are working on a means to remove tumor cells
that a surgeon can't see.

   By using gene therapy, scientists hope to deactivate the cancer cells that
remain behind after surgery and almost always cause a recurrence of the cancer.

   "There is an urgent need for more effective and less toxic treatment," says
Dr. Perry Nisen.

   Nisen reported recently that a form of gene therapy appears to hold cancer
cells in a state of suspended animation.

   The cells are alive but they have stopped their relentless growth. Although
the idea is still years away from practical use, Nisen and his colleagues hope
to try out the method on human patients within the next couple of years.

   Gene therapy is a method of inserting a set of instructions, or segments of
DNA, directly into a cell.

   Researchers commonly use a virus to infect the cells with the new gene. But
in experiments, scientists have had difficulty getting the gene only into cancer
cells and keeping it out of normal tissue surrounding the tumor. So Nisen
decided to use a gene that wouldn't hurt normal cells even if the new gene did
get into them.

   The idea was to take advantage of one key characteristic that distinguishes
cancer cells from normal brain tissue: Only the cancer cells are dividing.

   Nisen reported recently that two genes, called p21 and p27, stopped the
growth of brain tumors. Both genes are part of the natural regulation of the
cell cycle.

   When Nisen and his collaborators introduced them into tumor cells in the
mice, the cancer cells halted their usual life cycle. But the scientists aren't
sure how long the cancer cells will stay this way.

   Nisen envisions that one day, a surgeon would remove a tumor, then brush the
tumor site with gene therapy viruses to prevent any remaining cancer cells from
flaring up again.

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 1999


                              108 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1996 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                    April 11, 1996, Thursday, METRO EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. E2

LENGTH: 815 words

HEADLINE: Let's boost our research assets

BYLINE: By David Crane Toronto Star

BODY:

   NATIONS - and cities - that make the best use of their knowledge assets will
be the ones that prosper in the future, the recent jobs summit for the Group of
7 industrialized countries was told.

   It's a message that should be front and centre as Toronto pursues sustained
prosperity and growth after the deep and painful recession of the first half of
the 1990s.

   This week, one of Toronto's knowledge assets got a chance to show what it
could do to help create new activities and good jobs. We don't often think of a
hospital as a knowledge asset, but increasingly that's what a hospital is.

   The Hospital for Sick Children, which is probably Canada's single most
important research hospital, this week attracted nearly 30 companies to hear
about partnership opportunities with the Sick Kids' $50 million research
institute.

   The companies listened to about 40 top-flight medical researchers explain the
pioneering work they are doing, much of it in the field of genetics.

   "We view the private sector interested in human biology as a key partner,"
said Manuel Buchwald, the new director of research at the hospital.

   And hospital president Michael Strofolino promised that Sick Kids will
maintain its strong commitment to research despite the fact that the Mike Harris
government is cutting the hospital's over-all funding by 20 per cent.

   The hospital, he stressed, "is a knowledge-based institution for the future,"
and this vision will drive the organization's actions.

   In fact, the Hospital for Sick Children is just one part of a downtown
complex of medical research that is one of the largest such agglomerations in
North America.

   Across the road, the Samuel Lumenfeld Research Institute spends about $23
million a year on research, according to director Alan Bernstein.

   The amount of research in genetics being conducted there and at Sick Kids,
along with the University of Toronto's health research, provides an opportunity
to replace garment factories and traditional manufacturing with new
biotechnology companies, he said.

   Mount Sinai is already a shareholder in one genetics spin-off, Glyco Design.

   Genetics research, such as the gene-therapy program at Sick Kids, should have
a profound impact on medicine in the years ahead, as medical researchers learn
how many medical problems, from cancer to Alzheimer's disease, have a genetic

   origin.

   But now, mathematicians and information scientists are having to get
involved, since manipulating genetic data involves billions of bits of
information.

   Now there is an effort to establish a downtown Toronto facility that can
manipulate huge amounts of genetic data.

   The University of Toronto says its health-research programs and affiliated
teaching hospitals, including Sick Kids, Mount Sinai, the Toronto Hospital,
Princess Margaret Hospital and Wellesley Hospital, attract more than $275
million a year in funding for research.

   This includes almost $180 million a year allocated by the University of
Toronto. About $140 million is spent at teaching hospitals and other institutes,
and about $40 million spent on the university campus.

   But the news is both good and bad for the future of this knowledge asset.

   The good news is that more venture capital is available for medical-research
spin-offs than ever before.

   The Canadian Medical Discoveries Fund has about $180 million to invest, and
is still growing. The fund has just launched its Medical Discoveries
Commercialization Fund to provide early financing to help commercialize the work
of medical researchers.

   And Neuroscience Partners Ltd. has raised more than half of a targeted $102
million to fund early commercialization of neuroscience research.

   The bad news is that the federal government and Queen's Park are cutting
crucial funding to train the researchers of the future.

   Finance Minister Paul Martin announced in his 1995 budget that the budget of
the Medical Research Council, the main funder of basic medical research and
researchers in Canada, will be cut 10 per cent over three years. In this year's
budget, he announced another 3 per cent cut.

   This could mean fewer medical researchers in the future and a shrunken
knowledge asset in Toronto.

   At the same time, the Harris government is slashing spending in hospitals and
universities.

   This is why it's so important that Sick Kids was reaching out this week to
the private sector. More private funds have to be attracted into medical
research, not just for new products for big pharmaceutical companies, but also
to help train the researchers of the future and sustain Toronto's potential as a
key centre for biotechnology.

   If we want a world-class future, we have to invest in our knowledge assets.

   David Crane is The Star's Economics Editor. His column appears in the
Business section Tuesday, Thursday and Sunday.

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 1999


                              109 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1996 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                     April 2, 1996, Tuesday, METRO EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. E3

LENGTH: 75 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy tried on AIDS

BYLINE: (Reuter)

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   WASHINGTON (Reuter) - Gene therapy may help people infected with AIDS.

   In a study of three people known to carry HIV, the virus that causes AIDS,
scientists extracted immune cells, genetically modified them with an antiviral
gene and then returned them to the respective patients.

   The study, just published in the Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, showed the cells stayed alive four to five times longer than expected.

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 1999


                              110 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1996 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                     March 29, 1996, Friday, METRO EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. B1

LENGTH: 387 words

HEADLINE: Toronto is 'where it's happening' in search for a cure

BODY:

   Toronto and Canada are world leaders in cystic fibrosis research and
treatment, says Dr. Liz Tullis, medical director of Wellesley's adult cystic
fibrosis clinic.

   "Toronto is really where it's happening," she says. "We just keep getting
better at keeping people with CF alive."

   In the United States, 34 per cent of surviving cystic fibrosis patients are
adults. In Canada, the figure is 38 per cent. In Toronto, it is 47 per cent.

   In the '70s, physician Douglas Crozier, then a cystic fibrosis specialist at
the Hospital for Sick Children, pioneered dietary changes enabling patients to
digest foods they had never before been able to eat. The dietary changes led to
a turnaround in patients' body size and strength, and to improved survival
rates.

   Since then, Tullis says, things that once seemed impossible have come true.
More than 40 Toronto women with cystic fibrosis have successfully delivered
children. And people like Bill Eakins and John Hoddy are living decades longer
than would have been expected when they were born.

   In the last 10 years, Sick Kids researchers have discovered the defective
gene responsible for cystic fibrosis and have succeeded in correcting the cystic
fibrosis defect in the laboratory.

   But research is expensive and there's still a lot of work to be done.

   Tullis is now studying the quality of life in adults with cystic fibrosis and
why some are healthier than others. Other research at the Wellesley Central
includes studies into physiotherapy and nutritional therapy; why some people
have milder forms of the disease than others; and the types of bacteria that
cause lung disease in cystic fibrosis patients.

   Researchers at the University of Toronto and the Hospital for Sick Children
are planning a project that involves taking a normal copy of a cystic fibrosis
gene and putting it into the lungs of a patient, intending to correct the cystic
fibrosis. They hope this kind of gene therapy will lead to a cure or control.

   "This is an exciting time to be a CF researcher," says Tullis. "It is highly
fulfilling work and I feel a great optimism for the future. The chances are good
for a child being born today with cystic fibrosis, that a cure will be found in
his lifetime for his lung problems."

   (See related article by Janice Mawhinney on B1)

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 1999


                              111 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1996 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

              February 17, 1996, Saturday, SATURDAY SECOND EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. K7

LENGTH: 271 words

HEADLINE: Siblings wanted for Crohn's, colitis study

BYLINE: By Debra Black TORONTO STAR

BODY:

   A research team at Mount Sinai Hospital is looking for siblings with
ulcerative colitis or Crohn's disease for a study that hopes to find the gene or
genes responsible for both diseases.

   Researchers need at least two siblings who have inflammatory bowel disease
and their parents to donate blood samples so they can begin the search. The team
hopes to locate 100 to 150 families to participate in the study.

   The cause of both conditions is unknown. But evidence is mounting that there
is a strong genetic tie, says Dr. Robin McLeod, who heads the research team at
Mount Sinai and is an international expert in the field.

   Eight to 10 per cent of people who have Crohn's or ulcerative colitis have a
family history of it, she says.

   Crohn's disease or ulcerative colitis may be caused by a number of genes
working together, McLeod says. "You may require multiple genes to get it. But it
may also require environmental factors."

   McLeod and her research team hope the work they do will not only discover the
genes that are triggered but also what environmental factors may add to the
condition.

   Once they can answer the question of what causes the disease then they can
begin to look at improved treatments and maybe a cure through gene therapy, she
says.

   For those who are interested in volunteering in the study, McLeod emphasizes
that they must have confirmed diagnosis of Crohn's or ulcerative colitis, have a
sibling who also has the condition and have living parents willing to
participate in the study as well.

   To volunteer for the study, call Joan Blair or Charlene Cruz at (416)
586-8348.

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 1999


                              112 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1996 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                    February 2, 1996, Friday, METRO EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A17

LENGTH: 715 words

HEADLINE: Medicine on threshold of big change Biotechnology will mean cures,
scientists say

BYLINE: By David Crane TORONTO STAR

DATELINE: DAVOS, Switzerland

BODY:

   DAVOS, Switzerland - Science is on the verge of telling us much more about
our health, but we may not want all of the answers.

   And some people may not even want some of the research to be continued.

   But as a succession of medical researchers told a science workshop at the
world economic forum's annual meeting here yesterday, while some of the research
may be unsettling, the practice of medicine and health are in for big changes
over the next decade that should improve life for many.

   A big reason is the mapping of the genetic make-up of human beings, which
should be completed within the next seven years, and the expanding
identification of "bad" genes that cause everything from cancer and Alzheimer's
disease to asthma, diabetes, and schizophrenia, should lead to new forms of
intervention that will provide either cures or help manage the symptoms of these
diseases.

   Genetics, in fact, is on the threshold of radically changing medicine and how
we improve human health, said James Watson, who won the 1962 Nobel Prize in
medicine for his work on DNA and genetic codes.

   People will be able to take genetic tests to see if they have genes that lead
to Alzheimer's disease or put them in a high-risk category for breast cancer or
heart disease, Watson said.

   But the real purpose is not just to be able to tell people they are likely to
get Alzheimer's or some other disease, he said.

   The goal is to design drugs to retard or cure the disease or even allow the
introduction of new genes to cause the faulty gene to disappear in what is known
as gene therapy, he said.

   New technologies are also helping us identify the causes of problems that
have frustrated people for many years.

   For example, because of our ability to use the new technology of functional
brain imaging, which photographs the human brain at work, we know the nature of
dyslexia or why some otherwise smart people have such a difficult time reading,
said Sally and Bennett Shaywitz, both pediatricians and medical researchers at
the Yale University school of medicine.

   Until recently, dyslexia was considered to be a problem of vision, or more
cruelly treated as a symptom of laziness or anti-social attitudes.

   But now we know it is caused by a deficiency in the brain, the Shaywitzes
said. People with dyslexia cannot translate the sound of language into written
words, which makes it so tough for them to learn to read.

   Now that we have learned this, Sally Shaywitz said, we can scan youngsters to
see if they have dyslexia and begin early interventions to improve their ability
to learn to read.

   Biotechnology will deliver new vaccines, better drugs to prevent or treat
heart attacks, gene therapy for some diseases and much better diagnostic
devices, prolonging human life, said Herbert Pardes, dean of medicine at
Columbia University in New York.

   But people will be forced to make many more personal decisions about their
health, he said.

   Because of work in genetics, "all of us will have a complete slate before us
soon after we are born," identifying our underlying weaknesses and proneness to
certain diseases, which will force people to make decisions about diets,
smoking, and other forms of behavior.

   But the real purpose of finding the gene for the disease is as a first step
to finding a cure or means to slow the disease's progress.

   Some medical research will become increasingly controversial, Watson warned.

   For example, genetics may allow us someday to introduce new genes into human
eggs and sperm.

   "All of us are very scared of this because we don't quite know what could
happen 100 years from now," he said.

   So there's a consensus not to do this.

   But some fear the Hitler scenario, the possibility that a dictator would try
to create two classes of people - slaves and an elite.

   That's why they call for a slowdown in genetics research, Watson said. "But
if you are in a family predisposed to breast cancer or Alzheimer's disease,
there is a very positive reason for getting this information."

   Ultimately "we will have to rely on human wisdom, so we don't let technology
get out of hand," he said.

   In the meantime, he and other researchers predicted, scientific progress will
make life better for more people over the coming decade.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: JAMES WATSON: Wisdom must temper technology, he says.

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 1999


                              113 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1996 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                        January 25, 1996, Thursday, ONT

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A4

LENGTH: 336 words

HEADLINE: Genes that influence cell death pinpointed

BYLINE: (CP)

DATELINE: OTTAWA

BODY:

   OTTAWA (CP) - Researchers have discovered four genes that can stave off
programmed cell death in mammals.

   The discovery, reported in the British science journal Nature, is being
heralded as a significant advance in the struggle to understand diseases like
AIDS and cancer.

   "It's speculative stuff, but our sense is that it may be quite central to
some of these disorders," Alex MacKenzie, a researcher from the University of
Ottawa, said in an interview yesterday.

   Programmed cell death, or apoptosis, is one of the mysteries of medical
science. It is the process by which cells somehow "know" when to die, making way
for new ones.

   Apoptosis goes on all the time in healthy individuals. But if the process
goes awry, the consequences can be disastrous.

   If programmed cell death is slowed down too much, there may be a
proliferation of cells, as in cancer. If the process is speeded up too much it
could undercut the immune system, as in AIDS.

   Last year, a team led by MacKenzie and Robert Korneluk of the Children's
Hospital of Eastern Ontario identified a gene which they suggested must play a
role in apoptosis. The gene is missing in children with spinal muscular
dystrophy, a deadly childhood disease in which the muscles shrivel.

   The new study supports that theory and identifies three other genes that may
have a similar anti-death function.

   The researchers are not claiming to have found a magic bullet to prolong life
- just a better understanding of the paired processes of life and death within
the body.

   "It's relatively easy to find agents that kill cells," said Korneluk.
"Molecules that keep cells alive are comparatively rare."

   It may be possible eventually to insert anti-death genes when they are
missing or to repair them if they are defective.

   "It's going to be a long path until we get to gene therapy," said MacKenzie.
"But if one is ever in the situation to have an effective gene therapy . . .
these are the kinds of molecules you might look at using."

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 1999


                              114 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1996 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                        January 11, 1996, Thursday, ZONE

SECTION: MISSISSAUGA; Pg. MS4

LENGTH: 428 words

HEADLINE: Games teach 'DNA literacy'

BYLINE: By Sonya Procenko Special to The Star

BODY:

   Dan O'Day wants DNA to be a game people play.

   The Erindale College zoology professor and his former student, Roman
Romaniuk, have developed two DNA theme games - Codon and Gene Rummy.

   Codon is based on the gene sequences that underlie five major diseases
including AIDS and cancer.

   Players roll special DNA dice and use a game pad and chart to find those
sequences and the amino acids they encode to win.

   Like its familiar counterpart, Gene Rummy requires the winner to collect
three sets of three unique cards and yell Gene Rummy.

   Players gain points by collecting the sequence that encodes amino acids from
major proteins found in the human body.

   "Our goal is to bring DNA literacy to people," says O'Day, 49. "The games are
easy to understand and really designed as educational.

   "You don't need to have knowledge about DNA. When you're finished you'll know
what DNA is about."

   He says people are hearing more and more about DNA in contexts like
fingerprinting in the O. J. Simpson trial but they don't understand it.

   And with genes isolated for certain diseases, he says insurance companies may
start limiting people's coverage so it's important they know about DNA.

   From the games, he says people can learn many things, including how DNA
specifies protein structure and function and how differences are the essence of
diversity in life.

   "I'm not a promoter or entrepreneur. I'm an educator and I have a lot of
knowledge I'd like to share," says O'Day.

   Through his own publishing company, Trilobyte Press, he has also published
several books for students including How to Succeed at University.

   Aimed at children from Grade 7 to university, the games can be played by six
people or fewer and lasts half an hour.

   The inventors have successfully tested them with Grade 10 students at
Toronto's Branksome Hall. Individual schools in the Peel, Toronto and North York
boards use the games in their classrooms.

   This year, O'Day and Romaniuk began selling the games through biology supply
companies in Canada and the United States. So far they've produced only 1,000 of
each but now they're looking for a manufacturer to produce thousands more.

   O'Day says developing and packaging the games cost the co-developers $30,000
compared to the $100,000 to $200,000 pricetag it can cost to develop a game.

   "We'll do exceptionally well in the educational domain. I don't see why we
couldn't become a Yahtzee. This is a Yahtzee where you learn something."

   Story and photo also appear in Brampton edition on page BR4.

GRAPHIC: Star photo (Millar) GENE THERAPY: Erindale professor Dan O'Day is the
co-inventor of two games that educate players about DNA, the basic building
block of life.

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 1999


                              115 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1995 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                   December 7, 1995, Thursday, METRO EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A11

LENGTH: 190 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy offers 'hope' in AIDS fight

BYLINE: FROM CANADIAN PRESS

BODY:

   Scientists racing to discover ways to combat AIDS are pinning some hope on
gene therapy to rebuild the immune system after it has been destroyed by the
killer disease, an inquiry heard yesterday.

   "We're not there yet, but there's hope," said Dr. John Dick, professor of
molecular and medical genetics at the University of Toronto.

   Scientists are trying to block blood cells from being infected with HIV or to
limit it once it's in the body, Dick said in an interview.

   He was one of five experts who testified at an inquiry by Mr. Justice Horace
Krever into the safety of Canada's blood supply.

   Researchers are looking at a combination of methods of gene therapy to find a
way to stop the spread of the virus or to kill it once it's in the body, Dick
added.

   One method involves protecting cells so they don't become infected, he said.
A related strategy involves giving someone with HIV chemotherapy to kill the
blood cells and transplanting a new blood system, he said.

   If it's successful, gene therapy could prevent a death sentence from AIDS by
giving a victim a second chance with a new immune system, he said.

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 1999


                              116 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1995 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                   December 7, 1995, Thursday, METRO EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A11

LENGTH: 196 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy offers 'hope' in AIDS fight

BYLINE: FROM CANADIAN PRESS

BODY:

   Scientists racing to discover ways to combat AIDS are pinning some hope on
gene therapy to rebuild the immune system after it has been destroyed by the
killer disease, an inquiry heard yesterday.

   "We're not there yet, but there's hope," said Dr. John Dick, professor of
molecular and medical genetics at the University of Toronto.

   Scientists are trying to block blood cells from being infected with HIV or to
limit it once it's in the body, Dick said in an interview.

   He was one of five experts who testified at an inquiry by Mr. Justice Horace
Krever into the safety of Canada's blood supply.

   Researchers are looking at a combination of methods of gene therapy to find a
way to stop the spread of the virus or to kill it once it's in the body, Dick
added.

   One method involves protecting cells so they don't become infected, he said.
A related strategy involves giving someone with HIV chemotherapy to kill the
blood cells and transplanting a new blood system, he said.

   If it's successful, gene therapy could prevent a death sentence from AIDS by
giving a victim a second chance with a new immune system, he said.AIDS; CANada;
Krever; Inquiry

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 1999


                              117 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1995 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                December 3, 1995, Sunday, SUNDAY SECOND EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. D8

LENGTH: 1121 words

HEADLINE: Solving a delivery problem Two Canadian researchers tackle a major
challenge facing gene therapy

BYLINE: by Iain Wilson SPECIAL TO THE STAR

BODY:

   GENE THERAPY, the replacement of faulty genes in human cells with good genes,
is one of the rising stars of the biotechnology revolution. It promises to cure
many deadly and debilitating inherited diseases where they arise - at the
molecular level.

   However, the therapy still faces several challenges. One big one is finding
an efficient way to get large numbers of good genes into the target cells and
flick the switches that activate them.

   Two Canadian researchers may have come up with an answer. Dr. Patricia Chang
of McMaster University and Dr. Armand Keating, head of the bone marrow
transplant program at The Toronto Hospital, are both using physical rather than
the traditional biological methods to make the delivery.

   One of the favored biological delivery trucks are viruses and retroviruses,
which have a high degree of efficiency. But they are not foolproof. They can
carry only a small load of cargo, which means they can't transport some of the
larger genes needed to fix some diseases. Researchers also worry they could
deposit their load at the wrong address in a cell's chromosomes, setting off a
chain of events that could turn healthy cells cancerous.

   Retroviruses, which biochemically duplicate themselves in a reverse fashion,
have been shown to damage some cells in delivery.

   A newer method is the liposome, a soap bubble of fat with the ability to fuse
to the outer cell membrane before depositing its load. For all its promise,
however, the liposome is still relatively new and untested.

   Working on gene therapy separately in the mid-1980s, Keating and Chang sought
to avoid using viruses altogether.

   "It would seem to me intrinsically safer to avoid the use of retroviruses and
use as little viral genetic material as possible," Keating says. "There are some
other obvious advantages (to physical delivery), such as the ability to transfer
large genes and the fact that one doesn't need to modify the DNA."

   Keating's efforts to develop alternative delivery trucks led him to two
ingenious methods now being used in his labs.

   The first, known as electroporation, uses a short burst of electricity to
poke holes in the layer of fat molecules forming a cell's outer membrane.

   About 25 million target cells are suspended in a cell chamber containing
tissue culture and bits of genetic material including a correct copy of the gene
and instructions to make the gene work in the new cell.

   A brief spark of electric current from two electrodes placed inside the
chamber is passed through the tissue culture, enough to open temporary holes in
the cell's outer membrane that are large enough to let in the floating bits of
genetic material. Researchers have found the newly introduced DNA then makes its
way to the cell's nucleus.

   Keating wants to begin treating human cells with electroporation by the end
of the year or early 1996. The altered cells, having received the new DNA, would
be returned intravenously to patients undergoing treatment. Electroporation's
disease targets are likely to be leukemia, cancer and hemophilia.

   A much simpler delivery method developed by Keating is called bead
transfection. In its simplest form, bead transfection means rolling tiny glass
beads over the surface of cells anchored to the bottom of a glass dish. The
cells are bathed in a tissue culture containing the new genes and the
appropriate genetic material. The action of the glass beads over the cell's
membrane is strong enough to create doors for the new genetic material to enter.

   Meanwhile Chang, working out of McMaster's department of pediatrics, has
developed a method to deliver not the genes themselves but the proteins for
which the genes code. This avoids the tedious and expensive business of removing
the cells from the patient's body, altering them, and then reintroducing them.

   Chang is developing whole groups of cells called cell lines that contain
correct copies of some faulty disease genes. The cell lines are enclosed in a
tiny device called a microcapsule that is then surgically implanted into the
patient. The cells contained within the implanted devices are able to produce
the gene product lacking in the patient.

   Correct copies of the genes are first delivered to the cells by a physical
method known as DNA-mediated gene transfer. The gene to be implanted is first
packaged into a loop of DNA material called a plasmid. The plasmid contains both
the gene and the on-off switches called promoters. Without the promoters the
gene would be unable to work once inside the new cell.

   To isolate the gene and its switches from the plasmid the entire genetic
package is placed into a test tube containing the target cells and calcium
phosphate. The DNA reacts with the salt to produce a precipitate which then
settles on the surface of the target cells.

   Like all living things, cells need to eat and drink. In a process called
endocytosis, the bits of genetic material in the precipitate are essentially
eaten by the cells. The cell's own internal machinery then packages the DNA into
the nucleus where it becomes a permanent part of the cell's makeup.

   Because the DNA can be damaged on its journey to the nucleus, the vital genes
are cushioned by surrounding pieces of genetic material.

   Using various biological tests, Chang then selects the cells producing the
desired protein. The protein's presence is a good indicator the new gene has
made its way to the nucleus and is working properly. Those valuable few cells
are then isolated and put into an environment where they can make copies of
themselves.

   "There's quite a bit of work involved in generating the clone that you want
but the purpose is that once you get this ideal clone you don't have to worry
about doing the same for every patient," Chang says.

   The cloned cells are placed into microscopic spheres made of an alginate gel
extracted from seaweed. The alginate is actually a glob of sugar molecules. Once
in the alginate gel, they are trapped by an amino acid membrane made of
polylysine. The membrane forms a lattice-like structure around the gel and
cells.

   The membrane's structure is important because the holes in the lattice are
large enough for the proteins produced by the genetically-altered cells to
escape. After the membrane is in place, the alginate gel is liquefied using
chemicals. The microspheres are then ready to be surgically implanted.

   So far, Chang has been able to successfully treat dwarf mice suffering from a
shortage of growth hormone and mice with lysosomal storage diseases. She
anticipates microencapsulation will eventually be used to treat human diseases,
including hemophilia.

   * Iain Wilson is a freelance writer based in Toronto.

GRAPHIC: Star color drawing (CATHERINE FARLEY) How the new DNA gets inside the
cell

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 1999


                              118 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1995 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                December 3, 1995, Sunday, SUNDAY SECOND EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. D8

LENGTH: 1121 words

HEADLINE: Solving a delivery problem Two Canadian researchers tackle a major
challenge facing gene therapy

BYLINE: by Iain Wilson SPECIAL TO THE STAR

BODY:

   GENE THERAPY, the replacement of faulty genes in human cells with good genes,
is one of the rising stars of the biotechnology revolution. It promises to cure
many deadly and debilitating inherited diseases where they arise - at the
molecular level.

   However, the therapy still faces several challenges. One big one is finding
an efficient way to get large numbers of good genes into the target cells and
flick the switches that activate them.

   Two Canadian researchers may have come up with an answer. Dr. Patricia Chang
of McMaster University and Dr. Armand Keating, head of the bone marrow
transplant program at The Toronto Hospital, are both using physical rather than
the traditional biological methods to make the delivery.

   One of the favored biological delivery trucks are viruses and retroviruses,
which have a high degree of efficiency. But they are not foolproof. They can
carry only a small load of cargo, which means they can't transport some of the
larger genes needed to fix some diseases. Researchers also worry they could
deposit their load at the wrong address in a cell's chromosomes, setting off a
chain of events that could turn healthy cells cancerous.

   Retroviruses, which biochemically duplicate themselves in a reverse fashion,
have been shown to damage some cells in delivery.

   A newer method is the liposome, a soap bubble of fat with the ability to fuse
to the outer cell membrane before depositing its load. For all its promise,
however, the liposome is still relatively new and untested.

   Working on gene therapy separately in the mid-1980s, Keating and Chang sought
to avoid using viruses altogether.

   "It would seem to me intrinsically safer to avoid the use of retroviruses and
use as little viral genetic material as possible," Keating says. "There are some
other obvious advantages (to physical delivery), such as the ability to transfer
large genes and the fact that one doesn't need to modify the DNA."

   Keating's efforts to develop alternative delivery trucks led him to two
ingenious methods now being used in his labs.

   The first, known as electroporation, uses a short burst of electricity to
poke holes in the layer of fat molecules forming a cell's outer membrane.

   About 25 million target cells are suspended in a cell chamber containing
tissue culture and bits of genetic material including a correct copy of the gene
and instructions to make the gene work in the new cell.

   A brief spark of electric current from two electrodes placed inside the
chamber is passed through the tissue culture, enough to open temporary holes in
the cell's outer membrane that are large enough to let in the floating bits of
genetic material. Researchers have found the newly introduced DNA then makes its
way to the cell's nucleus.

   Keating wants to begin treating human cells with electroporation by the end
of the year or early 1996. The altered cells, having received the new DNA, would
be returned intravenously to patients undergoing treatment. Electroporation's
disease targets are likely to be leukemia, cancer and hemophilia.

   A much simpler delivery method developed by Keating is called bead
transfection. In its simplest form, bead transfection means rolling tiny glass
beads over the surface of cells anchored to the bottom of a glass dish. The
cells are bathed in a tissue culture containing the new genes and the
appropriate genetic material. The action of the glass beads over the cell's
membrane is strong enough to create doors for the new genetic material to enter.

   Meanwhile Chang, working out of McMaster's department of pediatrics, has
developed a method to deliver not the genes themselves but the proteins for
which the genes code. This avoids the tedious and expensive business of removing
the cells from the patient's body, altering them, and then reintroducing them.

   Chang is developing whole groups of cells called cell lines that contain
correct copies of some faulty disease genes. The cell lines are enclosed in a
tiny device called a microcapsule that is then surgically implanted into the
patient. The cells contained within the implanted devices are able to produce
the gene product lacking in the patient.

   Correct copies of the genes are first delivered to the cells by a physical
method known as DNA-mediated gene transfer. The gene to be implanted is first
packaged into a loop of DNA material called a plasmid. The plasmid contains both
the gene and the on-off switches called promoters. Without the promoters the
gene would be unable to work once inside the new cell.

   To isolate the gene and its switches from the plasmid the entire genetic
package is placed into a test tube containing the target cells and calcium
phosphate. The DNA reacts with the salt to produce a precipitate which then
settles on the surface of the target cells.

   Like all living things, cells need to eat and drink. In a process called
endocytosis, the bits of genetic material in the precipitate are essentially
eaten by the cells. The cell's own internal machinery then packages the DNA into
the nucleus where it becomes a permanent part of the cell's makeup.

   Because the DNA can be damaged on its journey to the nucleus, the vital genes
are cushioned by surrounding pieces of genetic material.

   Using various biological tests, Chang then selects the cells producing the
desired protein. The protein's presence is a good indicator the new gene has
made its way to the nucleus and is working properly. Those valuable few cells
are then isolated and put into an environment where they can make copies of
themselves.

   "There's quite a bit of work involved in generating the clone that you want
but the purpose is that once you get this ideal clone you don't have to worry
about doing the same for every patient," Chang says.

   The cloned cells are placed into microscopic spheres made of an alginate gel
extracted from seaweed. The alginate is actually a glob of sugar molecules. Once
in the alginate gel, they are trapped by an amino acid membrane made of
polylysine. The membrane forms a lattice-like structure around the gel and
cells.

   The membrane's structure is important because the holes in the lattice are
large enough for the proteins produced by the genetically-altered cells to
escape. After the membrane is in place, the alginate gel is liquefied using
chemicals. The microspheres are then ready to be surgically implanted.

   So far, Chang has been able to successfully treat dwarf mice suffering from a
shortage of growth hormone and mice with lysosomal storage diseases. She
anticipates microencapsulation will eventually be used to treat human diseases,
including hemophilia.

   * Iain Wilson is a freelance writer based in Toronto.

GRAPHIC: Star color drawing (CATHERINE FARLEY) How the new DNA gets inside the
cellgenetics; biotechnology; medicine; health; research; Canada

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 1999


                              119 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1995 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                November 19, 1995, Sunday, SUNDAY SECOND EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. F8

LENGTH: 883 words

HEADLINE: Medicine begins growing organs Tissue engineering is altering
landscape of health care forever

BYLINE: by Robert Boyd (KNIGHT RIDDER NEWSPAPERS) SPECIAL TO THE STAR

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   A NEW BRANCH of medicine is springing up to repair or regenerate body parts
for the millions of North Americans who lose skin, bones, nerves or other organs
to injury or disease.

   The idea is to use living cells to reconstruct lost or damaged tissues
instead of replacing them with artificial products made of metal, ceramics or
plastic.

   "We want to build on the body's own natural healing processes," says Linda
Griffith-Cima, a chemical engineer at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
who is building a substitute liver out of real veins, arteries and liver cells.

   Griffith-Cima has also helped University of Massachusetts anesthesiologist
Charles Vacanti to grow human ears on the backs of mice. They did it at the
request of a plastic surgeon from Boston's Children's Hospital.

   "He said, 'I see these kids who are born without ears. And I have boys who
come in whose ears have been chewed off in playground fights, and I can't sew
them back on because they're so chewed up,' " Griffith-Cima says.

   So she set about creating an ear-like scaffolding of porous, biodegradable
polyester fabric. Then she and Vacanti distributed human cartilage cells
throughout the form, and implanted the prototype ear on the back of a hairless
mouse.

   The mouse, specially bred to lack an immune system that might reject the
human tissue, nourished the ear as the cartilage cells grew to replace the
fibre. The mouse remains alive and healthy after the ear is removed, the
researchers say.

   "You end up with a piece of cartilage in the shape of an ear," Griffith-Cima
says.

   This grow-your-own-organ approach - a marriage of biology, chemistry and
physics - is called tissue engineering. Along with gene therapy, it is a hot
spot for researchers on the frontiers of health care.

   At the University of Toronto, for example, chemists have found a way to mimic
the process nature uses to make bones, shells and teeth (see separate story).

   If successful, tissue engineering "will forever change the medical
landscape," predicts Harold Alexander, head of the Department of Bioengineering
at the Hospital for Joint Diseases in New York City.

   U.S. surgeons currently perform more than 1 million operations a year to
replace torn or missing cartilage, using artificial metal or plastic prostheses.
The devices often fail or have unpleasant side effects.

   In experiments on animals, tissue engineers take a small piece of cartilage,
say from a rabbit's knee, grow it in the laboratory on a temporary "scaffold" of
a biodegradable material, and re-implant it in the knee.

   "Some day we'll be able to replace a whole joint with nothing but human
tissue," says Gail Naughton, president of Advanced Tissue Sciences Inc. of La
Jolla, Calif.

   By the end of the decade, according to Alexander, natural replacements will
be attempted for knee and hip joints, tendons and ligaments, heart and blood
vessels, livers, pancreases, kidneys and intestines.

   For some people, tissue engineering might also be a matter of life or death.
Robert Langer, a professor of chemical and biomedical engineering at MIT, says
30,000 Americans died for lack of a liver transplant last year. Fewer than 3,000
liver donors were available.

   Even advocates of tissue engineering caution that their science is in its
infancy and success is not guaranteed. Most of the products under development
are still being tested in laboratory dishes or on animals. Only a few human
trials are under way, and the results are mixed.

   Despite the uncertainties, the National Institutes of Health is spending $90
million (U.S.) a year on tissue engineering. The Food and Drug Administration
(FDA), which is responsible for the safety of medical devices, also supports
this emerging technology.

   "In the next few years, I'm confident we are going to see such products" in
medical practice, says Dr. Kiki Hellman, the FDA's manager of biotechnology
products. "The human trials are very encouraging."

   One reason for the government's enthusiasm is that tissue engineering could
eventually lower the cost of health care by reducing the need for expensive
surgery and hospitalization. By some estimates, organ and tissue loss cost as
much as $400 billion a year.

   "The loss of an organ or tissue is one of the most frequent, devastating and
costly problems in human health care," says Langer. "Tissue engineering may
create opportunities to provide less costly therapies that can save and improve
lives."

   Naughton, of Advanced Tissue Sciences, says her firm is growing human skin
cells on a biodegradable web to replace skin lost by burn victims without
leaving ugly scars.

   "There is a tremendous need for scarless healing," she says. "When you see a
burned baby in the hospital, you don't want it to grow up looking hideous."

   Naughton's company also is growing cells to heal diabetic ulcers - gaping
sores, usually on the bottom of the foot, that can lead to amputation. An
estimated 600,000 diabetic ulcers occur each year; treatment costs range from
$25,000 to $60,000.

   And VivoRx Inc., a company in Santa Monica, Calif., uses tissue engineering
to help diabetics produce their own insulin, a vital enzyme that regulates the
level of sugar in the blood.

   KNIGHT RIDDER NEWSPAPERS, WITH FILES FROM AP

GRAPHIC: AP color photo: SPARE PART: A BBC reporter examines a human ear grown
on the back of a hairless mouse in a Massachusetts laboratory. The mice remain
alive and healthy after the ears are removed.  KRT photo: NO SCARS: New human
skin is grown on a biodegradable web to replace burned tissue without leaving
ugly scars.

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 1999


                              120 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1995 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                November 19, 1995, Sunday, SUNDAY SECOND EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. F8

LENGTH: 883 words

HEADLINE: Medicine begins growing organs Tissue engineering is altering
landscape of health care forever

BYLINE: by Robert Boyd (KNIGHT RIDDER NEWSPAPERS) SPECIAL TO THE STAR

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   A NEW BRANCH of medicine is springing up to repair or regenerate body parts
for the millions of North Americans who lose skin, bones, nerves or other organs
to injury or disease.

   The idea is to use living cells to reconstruct lost or damaged tissues
instead of replacing them with artificial products made of metal, ceramics or
plastic.

   "We want to build on the body's own natural healing processes," says Linda
Griffith-Cima, a chemical engineer at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
who is building a substitute liver out of real veins, arteries and liver cells.

   Griffith-Cima has also helped University of Massachusetts anesthesiologist
Charles Vacanti to grow human ears on the backs of mice. They did it at the
request of a plastic surgeon from Boston's Children's Hospital.

   "He said, 'I see these kids who are born without ears. And I have boys who
come in whose ears have been chewed off in playground fights, and I can't sew
them back on because they're so chewed up,' " Griffith-Cima says.

   So she set about creating an ear-like scaffolding of porous, biodegradable
polyester fabric. Then she and Vacanti distributed human cartilage cells
throughout the form, and implanted the prototype ear on the back of a hairless
mouse.

   The mouse, specially bred to lack an immune system that might reject the
human tissue, nourished the ear as the cartilage cells grew to replace the
fibre. The mouse remains alive and healthy after the ear is removed, the
researchers say.

   "You end up with a piece of cartilage in the shape of an ear," Griffith-Cima
says.

   This grow-your-own-organ approach - a marriage of biology, chemistry and
physics - is called tissue engineering. Along with gene therapy, it is a hot
spot for researchers on the frontiers of health care.

   At the University of Toronto, for example, chemists have found a way to mimic
the process nature uses to make bones, shells and teeth (see separate story).

   If successful, tissue engineering "will forever change the medical
landscape," predicts Harold Alexander, head of the Department of Bioengineering
at the Hospital for Joint Diseases in New York City.

   U.S. surgeons currently perform more than 1 million operations a year to
replace torn or missing cartilage, using artificial metal or plastic prostheses.
The devices often fail or have unpleasant side effects.

   In experiments on animals, tissue engineers take a small piece of cartilage,
say from a rabbit's knee, grow it in the laboratory on a temporary "scaffold" of
a biodegradable material, and re-implant it in the knee.

   "Some day we'll be able to replace a whole joint with nothing but human
tissue," says Gail Naughton, president of Advanced Tissue Sciences Inc. of La
Jolla, Calif.

   By the end of the decade, according to Alexander, natural replacements will
be attempted for knee and hip joints, tendons and ligaments, heart and blood
vessels, livers, pancreases, kidneys and intestines.

   For some people, tissue engineering might also be a matter of life or death.
Robert Langer, a professor of chemical and biomedical engineering at MIT, says
30,000 Americans died for lack of a liver transplant last year. Fewer than 3,000
liver donors were available.

   Even advocates of tissue engineering caution that their science is in its
infancy and success is not guaranteed. Most of the products under development
are still being tested in laboratory dishes or on animals. Only a few human
trials are under way, and the results are mixed.

   Despite the uncertainties, the National Institutes of Health is spending $90
million (U.S.) a year on tissue engineering. The Food and Drug Administration
(FDA), which is responsible for the safety of medical devices, also supports
this emerging technology.

   "In the next few years, I'm confident we are going to see such products" in
medical practice, says Dr. Kiki Hellman, the FDA's manager of biotechnology
products. "The human trials are very encouraging."

   One reason for the government's enthusiasm is that tissue engineering could
eventually lower the cost of health care by reducing the need for expensive
surgery and hospitalization. By some estimates, organ and tissue loss cost as
much as $400 billion a year.

   "The loss of an organ or tissue is one of the most frequent, devastating and
costly problems in human health care," says Langer. "Tissue engineering may
create opportunities to provide less costly therapies that can save and improve
lives."

   Naughton, of Advanced Tissue Sciences, says her firm is growing human skin
cells on a biodegradable web to replace skin lost by burn victims without
leaving ugly scars.

   "There is a tremendous need for scarless healing," she says. "When you see a
burned baby in the hospital, you don't want it to grow up looking hideous."

   Naughton's company also is growing cells to heal diabetic ulcers - gaping
sores, usually on the bottom of the foot, that can lead to amputation. An
estimated 600,000 diabetic ulcers occur each year; treatment costs range from
$25,000 to $60,000.

   And VivoRx Inc., a company in Santa Monica, Calif., uses tissue engineering
to help diabetics produce their own insulin, a vital enzyme that regulates the
level of sugar in the blood.

   KNIGHT RIDDER NEWSPAPERS, WITH FILES FROM AP

GRAPHIC: AP color photo: SPARE PART: A BBC reporter examines a human ear grown
on the back of a hairless mouse in a Massachusetts laboratory. The mice remain
alive and healthy after the ears are removed.  KRT photo: NO SCARS: New human
skin is grown on a biodegradable web to replace burned tissue without leaving
ugly scars.medicine; biotechnology; transplant; research

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 1999


                              121 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1995 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                   August 30, 1995, Wednesday, METRO EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A15

LENGTH: 690 words

HEADLINE: Halifax blood plant a waste, probe told Biotechnology to make donation
system obsolete

BYLINE: By Rebecca Bragg Toronto Star

BODY:

   Thanks to advances in genetic engineering, blood donation as it now exists
will be obsolete in 10 years or less, a leading expert in biotechnology told a
federal probe into the blood system yesterday.

   Consequently, a $200 million blood processing plant now in the works outside
Halifax is a waste of money which could be put to better use in "cutting edge"
genetic research and development, the probe was told.

   Mr. Justice Horace Krever listened with keen interest to a closing statement
from Dr. William Cochrane, former chairperson both of Connaught Laboratories and
the federal government's National Biotechnology Advisory Committee.

   Scientific progress in recombinant blood products, gene therapy and synthetic
blood production is bounding forward so quickly that the plant will be
antiquated by the time it is finished, Cochrane testified. The technologies it
intends to use for "fractionating" human blood plasma are already 25 years old,
Cochrane claims.

   A joint venture between the Red Cross and Miles Inc., a subsidiary of the
German-based multinational Bayer, the plant is expected to generate at least 400
jobs in Bedford, N.S., and inject about $1 billion into the provincial economy.

   Although the project was officially launched last August, construction is not
slated to begin until 1997, with completion two years later.

   However, by as early as the end of the decade, the need for whole blood will
be greatly diminished by new approaches to biotechnology, Cochrane believes.

   And if plasma, the fluid from which blood products are now made, is still
needed at all, it will be only for the production of albumin, a blood protein
used as a stabilizer. At present, albumin is too expensive to produce using
recombinant technology, Cochrane told the inquiry.

   Most Canadian hemophiliacs already use recombinant (or genetically
engineered) clotting products which, apart from albumin, contain no other
materials derived directly from human blood.

   However, a document previously referred to in the hearings, but not yet
introduced as evidence, suggests that the primary purpose for the plant is to
produce plasma-derived blood products for export, not for Canadians.

   In a June, 1994, report to health ministers titled "At the crossroads: risks
and opportunities of a plasma fractionation plant for Canada," a panel of
experts wrote:

   "It is assumed that by the time the plant is operational, recombinant Factor
VIII will continue to be the product of choice (for Canadians). The plant will
produce plasma-derived Factor VIII for export (guaranteed under the Miles
contract). This Factor VIII will provide Canada with a fallback should supplies
of the recombinant be interrupted."

   Halifax lawyer Dawna Ring represents Janet Conners at the inquiry, a woman
now suffering from AIDS after being infected by her late husband, Randy, a
hemophiliac. Conners has been an outspoken opponent of the plant, as has the
Canadian Hemophilia Society.

   Ring questions the ethics of exporting plasma-derived blood products, known
to be far less pure than recombinant, which Canadians themselves would not use.

   But Red Cross spokesperson Ken Mews says that the Red Cross won't be
manufacturing clotting factor VIII and IX at the plant at all, let alone
exporting it.

   "It's not going to get into the business of manufacturing product for which
there is already a recombinant product on the market, or in the early stages of
development," Mews told The Star. "The driving product right now is albumin, and
very steep increases in demand are anticipated over the next 10 years."

   Mews says it's possible that Miles will produce clotting factor for export,
but the partner will be fractionating plasma it collects for its own customers.

   Based on recent industry estimates, the technology for the new plant will be
viable for about 20 years, beyond which nobody can predict what will be in use,
Mews says.

   Cochrane also testified that Connaught had been using recombinant technology
"for some time" in attempts to develop an AIDS vaccine, and expected to begin
phase one human trials within a year.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: WILLIAM COCHRANE: Halifax plant technologies already 25 years
old.

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 1999


                              122 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1995 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                   August 30, 1995, Wednesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A15

LENGTH: 688 words

HEADLINE: Halifax blood plant a waste, probe told Biotechnology to make donation
system obsolete

BYLINE: BY REBECCA BRAGG TORONTO STAR

BODY:


    Thanks to advances in genetic engineering, blood donation as it now exists
will be obsolete in 10 years or less, a leading expert in biotechnology told a
federal probe into the blood system yesterday.

   Consequently, a $ 200 million blood processing plant now in the works outside
Halifax is a waste of money which could be put to better use in "cutting edge"
genetic research and development, the probe was told.

   Mr. Justice Horace Krever listened with keen interest to a closing statement
from Dr. William Cochrane, former chairperson both of Connaught Laboratories and
the federal government's National Biotechnology Advisory Committee.

   Scientific progress in recombinant blood products, gene therapy and synthetic
blood production is bounding forward so quickly that the plant will be
antiquated by the time it is finished, Cochrane testified. The technologies it
intends to use for "fractionating" human blood plasma are already 25 years old,
Cochrane claims.

   A joint venture between the Red Cross and Miles Inc., a subsidiary of the
German-based multinational Bayer, the plant is expected to generate at least 400
jobs in Bedford, N.S., and inject about $ 1 billion into the provincial economy.

   Although the project was officially launched last August, construction is not
slated to begin until 1997, with completion two years later.

   However, by as early as the end of the decade, the need for whole blood will
be greatly diminished by new approaches to biotechnology, Cochrane believes.

   And if plasma, the fluid from which blood products are now made, is still
needed at all, it will be only for the production of albumin, a blood protein
used as a stabilizer. At present, albumin is too expensive to produce using
recombinant technology, Cochrane told the inquiry.

   Most Canadian hemophiliacs already use recombinant (or genetically
engineered) clotting products which, apart from albumin, contain no other
materials derived directly from human blood.

   However, a document previously referred to in the hearings, but not yet
introduced as evidence, suggests that the primary purpose for the plant is to
produce plasma-derived blood products for export, not for Canadians.

   In a June, 1994, report to health ministers titled "At the crossroads: risks
and opportunities of a plasma fractionation plant for Canada," a panel of
experts wrote:

   "It is assumed that by the time the plant is operational, recombinant Factor
VIII will continue to be the product of choice (for Canadians). The plant will
produce plasma-derived Factor VIII for export (guaranteed under the Miles
contract). This Factor VIII will provide Canada with a fallback should supplies
of the recombinant be interrupted."

   Halifax lawyer Dawna Ring represents Janet Conners at the inquiry, a woman
now suffering from AIDS after being infected by her late husband, Randy, a
hemophiliac. Conners has been an outspoken opponent of the plant, as has the
Canadian Hemophilia Society.

   Ring questions the ethics of exporting plasma-derived blood products, known
to be far less pure than recombinant, which Canadians themselves would not use.

   But Red Cross spokesperson Ken Mews says that the Red Cross won't be
manufacturing clotting factor VIII and IX at the plant at all, let alone
exporting it.

   "It's not going to get into the business of manufacturing product for which
there is already a recombinant product on the market, or in the early stages of
development," Mews told The Star. "The driving product right now is albumin, and
very steep increases in demand are anticipated over the next 10 years."

   Mews says it's possible that Miles will produce clotting factor for export,
but the partner will be fractionating plasma it collects for its own customers.

   Based on recent industry estimates, the technology for the new plant will be
viable for about 20 years, beyond which nobody can predict what will be in use,
Mews says.

   Cochrane also testified that Connaught had been using recombinant technology
"for some time" in attempts to develop an AIDS vaccine, and expected to begin
phase one human trials within a year.


GRAPHIC: PHOTO: WILLIAM COCHRANE: Halifax plant technologies already 25 years
old.

LOAD-DATE: August 31, 1995


                              123 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1995 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                 August 27, 1995, Sunday, SUNDAY SECOND EDITION

SECTION: ENTERTAINMENT; Pg. C4

LENGTH: 642 words

HEADLINE: Quarterly takes a dizzying, dazzling tour of Europe

BYLINE: By Bruce Blackadar

BODY:

   Queen's Quarterly, which briskly and confidently keeps moving on from
strength to strength, tackles thematically in its new issue the topic of Europe
in this very bloody century.

   A huge subject, obviously, barely containable for sure within the strictures
of a 230- page edition, but the editors' efforts make for a consistently
interesting, provoking package.

   The contents roam, dizzyingly, dazzlingly, from a disturbing photo essay on
the effects of Russia's nuclear program by Robert Del Tredici, an interview with
the brilliant, grand historian Eric Hobsbawn (his book, Age Of Extremes, is
garnering wonderful reviews around the globe), essays and articles by the U of
T's Modris Ekstein, Diana Johnstone (on the Balkans), Robert Fulford (on George
Steiner), Robert Everett-Green (on Estonia), poems (Nobel Prize winner Joseph
Brodsky has five) plus reviews, travel diaries and short stories.

   The issue is surely worth seeking out in the bigger, better news stores and
worth every penny. Let me leave you with one of the many insights, this one from
Diana Johnstone:

   "Yet to an important extent, the disintegration of Yugoslavia was intimately
related to European integration, just as the social disintegration it
exemplifies is related to the worldwide triumph of the supposedly 'integrating'
market. For the globalization of the market brings with it exacerbation of
competition and antagonism between its polarized winners and losers."

   GRAY AREA: Benjamin DeMott is smart enough to know he's probably going to get
a boxcar full of not-nice letters sent his way in the next few weeks.

   The social critic has written a long, beautifully composed and well-reasoned
essay in Harper's that shines a nay-saying spotlight on a widespread and growing
trend in the U.S. - a trend he views as dishonest and, potentially, harmful.

   Just what is it that is piquing DeMott? Well, these days the media,
corporations, advertising agencies, governments and cultural industries are
churning out nicey-nice images of blacks and whites getting along just famously,
being buddies, great pals, we're-really-all-the-same, racism's over,
blahblahblah, etcetera - and all this happy-happy stuff is a "fatuous untruth"
that glosses over the need, still, for political action to change what is a
clear division, economically and historically, between blacks and whites.

   A hard-hitting piece outlining what DeMott says are two fundamental truths
about life in the U.S.: ". . . because of what happened in the past, blacks and
whites cannot yet be the same, and that because what happened in the past was no
mere matter of will or insult but the outcome of an established caste structure
that has only recently begun to be dismantled, it is not reparable by one-to-one
goodwill."

   NO CIGAR: Many, even technoramuses, will be struck by the cover of Wired.

   It shows O.J. Simpson - as a white guy with blond hair. The pic is to hype
the cover story by media critic Jon Katz. In it, he attempts to link what he
perceives as the excesses and failures of the court and media in the O.J. case
to the ongoing disintegration of most of the other big institutions in U.S.
society. Usually sure-footed and shrewd in previous analyses that I've read of
his, here Katz comes a bit of a cropper, indulging as he does in the display of
slightly too gaudy swatches of pseudo-apocalyptic mumbo-jumbo.

   Of much more interest is the riveting piece on Leroy Hood, a molecular
biologist with breathtaking vision who is making machines that will be able to
detect, easily, accurately and swiftly, your faulty disease-making genes before
you get sick and then change them by gene therapy. If you think this is just too
far out over the edge, guess who's giving Hood his very substantial research
money? Bill Gates.

   Bruce Blackadar is a Toronto freelance writer.

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 1999


                              124 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1995 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                     August 27, 1995, Sunday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: ENTERTAINMENT; Pg. C4

LENGTH: 642 words

HEADLINE: Quarterly takes a dizzying, dazzling tour of Europe

BYLINE: BY BRUCE BLACKADAR

BODY:


    Queen's Quarterly, which briskly and confidently keeps moving on from
strength to strength, tackles thematically in its new issue the topic of Europe
in this very bloody century.

   A huge subject, obviously, barely containable for sure within the strictures
of a 230- page edition, but the editors' efforts make for a consistently
interesting, provoking package.

   The contents roam, dizzyingly, dazzlingly, from a disturbing photo essay on
the effects of Russia's nuclear program by Robert Del Tredici, an interview with
the brilliant, grand historian Eric Hobsbawn (his book, Age Of Extremes, is
garnering wonderful reviews around the globe), essays and articles by the U of
T's Modris Ekstein, Diana Johnstone (on the Balkans), Robert Fulford (on George
Steiner), Robert Everett-Green (on Estonia), poems (Nobel Prize winner Joseph
Brodsky has five) plus reviews, travel diaries and short stories.

   The issue is surely worth seeking out in the bigger, better news stores and
worth every penny. Let me leave you with one of the many insights, this one from
Diana Johnstone:

   "Yet to an important extent, the disintegration of Yugoslavia was intimately
related to European integration, just as the social disintegration it
exemplifies is related to the worldwide triumph of the supposedly 'integrating'
market. For the globalization of the market brings with it exacerbation of
competition and antagonism between its polarized winners and losers."

   GRAY AREA: Benjamin DeMott is smart enough to know he's probably going to get
a boxcar full of not-nice letters sent his way in the next few weeks.

   The social critic has written a long, beautifully composed and well-reasoned
essay in Harper's that shines a nay-saying spotlight on a widespread and growing
trend in the U.S. - a trend he views as dishonest and, potentially, harmful.

   Just what is it that is piquing DeMott? Well, these days the media,
corporations, advertising agencies, governments and cultural industries are
churning out nicey-nice images of blacks and whites getting along just famously,
being buddies, great pals, we're-really-all-the-same, racism's over,
blahblahblah, etcetera - and all this happy-happy stuff is a "fatuous untruth"
that glosses over the need, still, for political action to change what is a
clear division, economically and historically, between blacks and whites.

   A hard-hitting piece outlining what DeMott says are two fundamental truths
about life in the U.S.: ". . . because of what happened in the past, blacks and
whites cannot yet be the same, and that because what happened in the past was no
mere matter of will or insult but the outcome of an established caste structure
that has only recently begun to be dismantled, it is not reparable by one-to-one
goodwill."

   NO CIGAR: Many, even technoramuses, will be struck by the cover of Wired.

   It shows O.J. Simpson - as a white guy with blond hair. The pic is to hype
the cover story by media critic Jon Katz. In it, he attempts to link what he
perceives as the excesses and failures of the court and media in the O.J. case
to the ongoing disintegration of most of the other big institutions in U.S.
society. Usually sure-footed and shrewd in previous analyses that I've read of
his, here Katz comes a bit of a cropper, indulging as he does in the display of
slightly too gaudy swatches of pseudo-apocalyptic mumbo-jumbo.

   Of much more interest is the riveting piece on Leroy Hood, a molecular
biologist with breathtaking vision who is making machines that will be able to
detect, easily, accurately and swiftly, your faulty disease-making genes before
you get sick and then change them by gene therapy. If you think this is just too
far out over the edge, guess who's giving Hood his very substantial research
money? Bill Gates.

   Bruce Blackadar is a Toronto freelance writer.


LOAD-DATE: August 28, 1995


                              125 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1995 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                      July 31, 1995, Monday, METRO EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. B3

LENGTH: 587 words

HEADLINE: Researchers seek out new diabetes treatment

BYLINE: (Special) (CALGARY HERALD)

DATELINE: CALGARY

BODY:

   CALGARY (Special) - A University of Calgary molecular biologist has found a
way to make a liver work like a pancreas - a potential treatment for people with
diabetes - by inserting an insulin-producing gene, usually active in cells of
the pancreas, into liver cells.

   "The idea of gene therapy is not a new one," but using the insulin gene to
eventually treat diabetes is a novel approach, says Dr. Irene Wanke, a
researcher in the University of Calgary's medical faculty.

   Existing treatments for diabetes are based on the principles set out by
Canadian research pioneers Frederick Banting and Charles Best. They first
proposed injecting patients with insulin in the 1920s.

   Today, daily insulin injections remain the principle treatment for
insulin-dependent diabetics. But they do not regulate blood glucose levels as
closely as a healthy pancreas.

   Wanke's gene treatment would be able to regulate insulin levels based on the
body's metabolic requirements.

   "It's very important as to the timing of when you get insulin," she notes.

   In a healthy individual, the pancreas produces insulin in response to glucose
levels in the blood.

   After a meal, food particles are broken down into smaller molecules such as
fatty acids, amino acids and glucose. Glucose gets absorbed into the blood
through the lining of the small intestine where rising blood sugar levels
trigger production of insulin in the pancreas.

   Insulin is the body's storage enzyme. It stores glucose in muscle and fat
tissues - the body's energy reserves.

   When most of the glucose has been stored, the blood sugar levels drop and the
gene that makes insulin shuts off.

   In patients with Type I diabetes, or early onset, the beta cells that produce
insulin in the pancreas are missing. Glucose isn't stored properly and the body
doesn't have enough energy for normal functions.

   Type II diabetics make insulin but not enough to meet the body's needs.

   Researchers know that Type II has a strong genetic component, probably
influenced by many different genes.

   "No one is exactly sure what these different genes do," Wanke says.

   Each human gene has two major components - the regulatory region that
monitors the gene's activity and the "business end" that codes for the specific
protein produced by the gene. These proteins, such as enzymes and hormones,
control growth.

   Wanke fuses the regulatory region of a liver gene with the business end of an
insulin gene.

   This combination regulates blood sugar levels because the regulatory part
comes from a common liver gene, that responds to glucose levels much like the
insulin gene in the pancreas.

   The fused gene is "pasted" on to a piece of DNA called a plasmid, and mixed
with a salt solution that is injected into rat liver tissue in a petri dish.

   But the artificially created genetic string doesn't stay in the liver cells
permanently, which means that eventually the new gene disappears from the liver
cells and they stop making insulin.

   It will be some time before the research, funded by the Medical Research
Council, Alberta Heritage Foundation for Medical Research and the Canadian
Diabetes Association, can be used to treat people suffering from diabetes, Wanke
says. "Whether that is attainable depends on what the tests show" in laboratory
animals.

   The technique has worked in tissue cultures and in the livers of live
laboratory rats. But it is still uncertain how it will respond to glucose levels
in the bloodstream of the entire rat.

   CALGARY HERALD

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 1999


                              126 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1995 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                      July 31, 1995, Monday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. B3

LENGTH: 583 words

HEADLINE: Researchers seek out new diabetes treatment

BYLINE: SPECIAL) (CALGARY HERALD)

DATELINE: CALGARY

BODY:

   A University of Calgary molecular biologist has found a way to make a liver
work like a pancreas - a potential treatment for people with diabetes - by
inserting an insulin-producing gene, usually active in cells of the pancreas,
into liver cells.

   "The idea of gene therapy is not a new one," but using the insulin gene to
eventually treat diabetes is a novel approach, says Dr. Irene Wanke, a
researcher in the University of Calgary's medical faculty.

   Existing treatments for diabetes are based on the principles set out by
Canadian research pioneers Frederick Banting and Charles Best. They first
proposed injecting patients with insulin in the 1920s.

   Today, daily insulin injections remain the principle treatment for
insulin-dependent diabetics. But they do not regulate blood glucose levels as
closely as a healthy pancreas.

   Wanke's gene treatment would be able to regulate insulin levels based on the
body's metabolic requirements.

   "It's very important as to the timing of when you get insulin," she notes.

   In a healthy individual, the pancreas produces insulin in response to glucose
levels in the blood.

   After a meal, food particles are broken down into smaller molecules such as
fatty acids, amino acids and glucose. Glucose gets absorbed into the blood
through the lining of the small intestine where rising blood sugar levels
trigger production of insulin in the pancreas.

   Insulin is the body's storage enzyme. It stores glucose in muscle and fat
tissues - the body's energy reserves.

   When most of the glucose has been stored, the blood sugar levels drop and the
gene that makes insulin shuts off.

   In patients with Type I diabetes, or early onset, the beta cells that produce
insulin in the pancreas are missing. Glucose isn't stored properly and the body
doesn't have enough energy for normal functions.

   Type II diabetics make insulin but not enough to meet the body's needs.

   Researchers know that Type II has a strong genetic component, probably
influenced by many different genes.

   "No one is exactly sure what these different genes do," Wanke says.

   Each human gene has two major components - the regulatory region that
monitors the gene's activity and the "business end" that codes for the specific
protein produced by the gene. These proteins, such as enzymes and hormones,
control growth.

   Wanke fuses the regulatory region of a liver gene with the business end of an
insulin gene.

   This combination regulates blood sugar levels because the regulatory part
comes from a common liver gene, that responds to glucose levels much like the
insulin gene in the pancreas.

   The fused gene is "pasted" on to a piece of DNA called a plasmid, and mixed
with a salt solution that is injected into rat liver tissue in a petri dish.

   But the artificially created genetic string doesn't stay in the liver cells
permanently, which means that eventually the new gene disappears from the liver
cells and they stop making insulin.

   It will be some time before the research, funded by the Medical Research
Council, Alberta Heritage Foundation for Medical Research and the Canadian
Diabetes Association, can be used to treat people suffering from diabetes, Wanke
says. "Whether that is attainable depends on what the tests show" in laboratory
animals.

   The technique has worked in tissue cultures and in the livers of live
laboratory rats. But it is still uncertain how it will respond to glucose levels
in the bloodstream of the entire rat.

   CALGARY HERALD


LOAD-DATE: August 2, 1995


                              127 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1995 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                      July 30, 1995, Sunday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A2

LENGTH: 212 words

HEADLINE: 'Suicide genes' wipe out cancer in lab animals

BYLINE: AP)

DATELINE: BAR HARBOR, Me.

BODY:

   Injections of viruses armed with "suicide genes" have eradicated brain tumors
and colon cancer in lab animals, opening the way to an entirely new kind of
cancer treatment, a researcher said yesterday.

   Similar experiments have also corrected hemophilia in dogs, when the viruses
were engineered to carry a gene to repair the blood-clotting defect, said Savio
Woo, a biologist with the Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Baylor College of
Medicine in Houston.

   "The results were unbelievable," Woo said. "The tumor just went away. Every
animal responded." He described the work at a meeting of geneticists in Bar
Harbor.

   Woo said he's "tremendously optimistic" about the new science of gene
therapy. But he tempered his optimism with a reminder that enormous scientific
obstacles and years of work remain before the research leads to wide use of
safe, effective treatments.

   "We need to be aware how technically challenging it is," he said. "There is
also fundamental cell biology and immunology we need to learn."

   In a new study, Woo clipped what he called a "suicide gene" from a herpes
virus and injected it into tumors of mice with colon cancer. He also injected a
virus carrying an immune-system stimulant to intensify the effect of the suicide
gene.


LOAD-DATE: August 3, 1995


                              128 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1995 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                      July 28, 1995, Friday, METRO EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A2

LENGTH: 217 words

HEADLINE: 'Suicide genes' wipe out cancer in lab animals

BYLINE: (AP)

DATELINE: BAR HARBOR, Me.

BODY:

   BAR HARBOR, Me. (AP) - Injections of viruses armed with "suicide genes" have
eradicated brain tumors and colon cancer in lab animals, opening the way to an
entirely new kind of cancer treatment, a researcher said yesterday.

   Similar experiments have also corrected hemophilia in dogs, when the viruses
were engineered to carry a gene to repair the blood-clotting defect, said Savio
Woo, a biologist with the Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Baylor College of
Medicine in Houston.

   "The results were unbelievable," Woo said. "The tumor just went away. Every
animal responded." He described the work at a meeting of geneticists in Bar
Harbor.

   Woo said he's "tremendously optimistic" about the new science of gene
therapy. But he tempered his optimism with a reminder that enormous scientific
obstacles and years of work remain before the research leads to wide use of
safe, effective treatments.

   "We need to be aware how technically challenging it is," he said. "There is
also fundamental cell biology and immunology we need to learn."

   In a new study, Woo clipped what he called a "suicide gene" from a herpes
virus and injected it into tumors of mice with colon cancer. He also injected a
virus carrying an immune-system stimulant to intensify the effect of the suicide
gene.

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 1999


                              129 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1995 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                      July 17, 1995, Monday, METRO EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. D12

LENGTH: 424 words

HEADLINE: Wanted: Super drug to fight all diseases

BYLINE: By Leslie Papp TORONTO STAR

DATELINE: MONTREAL

BODY:

   MONTREAL - The battle against cancer and the war against infectious disease
are coming together in a single front as doctors seek a new breed of drug, able
to fight everything from breast tumors to AIDS.

   More than 8,000 scientists and physicians from around the world are meeting
here to exchange ideas in that struggle, at a congress billed as a "gathering of
giants" in medical research.

   "We're at a turning point," said Dr. Michael Bergeron, congress president and
chairperson of the department of microbiology at Laval University.

   "The way of the future is that we will be using the same drugs for cancer and
for infectious disease," he said in an interview, before formally opening the
International Congress of Chemotherapy.

   The human body's own defence mechanisms hold the key, he said, adding that
these provide a medical common ground for challenging both cancer and invading
microbes.

   "The cells that your body uses to defend itself don't make much distinction
between (mutating) cancer cells and bacteria," Bergeron said.

   The secret to defeating both forms of attacker lies in drugs and genetic
therapies that will regulate and channel the body's natural defences, he said.
"These two diseases are extremely important."

   Infectious diseases kill about 22 million people yearly and cancers kill
about 5 million.

   Drugs targeting both these threats to human health would, in the case of
cancer, beef up an immune system that's weak and doesn't aggressively spot and
attack mutant cells, Bergeron said.

   Similar drugs could be used to narrowly focus the body's defences on certain
microbes.

   Cancer researchers and those working on infectious diseases were once widely
separated, each in their own ivory tower, Bergeron said.

   Now those two solitudes are coming together and, in a speech to the congress,
he urged widespread creation of multidisciplinary teams combining experts of
various backgrounds.

   The event began with speeches from two former foes, Dr. Luc Montagnier of the
Pasteur Institute in Paris and Dr. Robert Gallo of the U.S. National Cancer
Institute.

   Gallo called for virology surveillance centres to be set up near rain forests
to monitor infectious diseases that could be spreading from these zones.

   AIDS and the ebola virus both originated in the rain forests of Africa.

   Gallo and Montagnier were bitterly at odds a decade ago over who discovered
the AIDS virus.

   Eventually, Gallo conceded that Montagnier was the first to isolate the HIV
virus that causes AIDS in 1983.

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 1999


                              130 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1995 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                      July 17, 1995, Monday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. D12

LENGTH: 421 words

HEADLINE: Wanted: Super drug to fight all diseases

BYLINE: BY LESLIE PAPP TORONTO STAR

DATELINE: MONTREAL

BODY:

   The battle against cancer and the war against infectious disease are coming
together in a single front as doctors seek a new breed of drug, able to fight
everything from breast tumors to AIDS.

   More than 8,000 scientists and physicians from around the world are meeting
here to exchange ideas in that struggle, at a congress billed as a "gathering of
giants" in medical research.

   "We're at a turning point," said Dr. Michael Bergeron, congress president and
chairperson of the department of microbiology at Laval University.

   "The way of the future is that we will be using the same drugs for cancer and
for infectious disease," he said in an interview, before formally opening the
International Congress of Chemotherapy.

   The human body's own defence mechanisms hold the key, he said, adding that
these provide a medical common ground for challenging both cancer and invading
microbes.

   "The cells that your body uses to defend itself don't make much distinction
between (mutating) cancer cells and bacteria," Bergeron said.

   The secret to defeating both forms of attacker lies in drugs and genetic
therapies that will regulate and channel the body's natural defences, he said.
"These two diseases are extremely important."

   Infectious diseases kill about 22 million people yearly and cancers kill
about 5 million.

   Drugs targeting both these threats to human health would, in the case of
cancer, beef up an immune system that's weak and doesn't aggressively spot and
attack mutant cells, Bergeron said.

   Similar drugs could be used to narrowly focus the body's defences on certain
microbes.

   Cancer researchers and those working on infectious diseases were once widely
separated, each in their own ivory tower, Bergeron said.

   Now those two solitudes are coming together and, in a speech to the congress,
he urged widespread creation of multidisciplinary teams combining experts of
various backgrounds.

   The event began with speeches from two former foes, Dr. Luc Montagnier of the
Pasteur Institute in Paris and Dr. Robert Gallo of the U.S. National Cancer
Institute.

   Gallo called for virology surveillance centres to be set up near rain forests
to monitor infectious diseases that could be spreading from these zones.

   AIDS and the ebola virus both originated in the rain forests of Africa.

   Gallo and Montagnier were bitterly at odds a decade ago over who discovered
the AIDS virus.

   Eventually, Gallo conceded that Montagnier was the first to isolate the HIV
virus that causes AIDS in 1983.


LOAD-DATE: July 18, 1995


                              131 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1995 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                      May 23, 1995, Tuesday, METRO EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A5

LENGTH: 145 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy studied to fight bone disease

BYLINE: (Reuter)

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   WASHINGTON (Reuter) - American researchers reported yesterday that they are
able to "transplant" cells that produce bone and cartilage from one mouse to
another.

   The findings may open new avenues for gene therapy in treating human
illnesses such as "brittle bone" disease, dwarfism, osteoporosis and
osteoarthritis, they said in an article in Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences.

   Using a complex procedure similar to a blood transfusion, researchers at
Jefferson Medical College in Philadelphia said they found that precursor cells
transplanted from donor mice replaced between 3 and 10 per cent of bone and
cartilage cells in other mice one to five months after injection.

   The researchers said this development may enable scientists to correct or
compensate for the genetic flaws that produce symptoms of the aforementioned
diseases.

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 1999


                              132 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1995 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                      May 23, 1995, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A5

LENGTH: 140 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy studied to fight bone disease

BYLINE: REUTER)

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   American researchers reported yesterday that they are able to "transplant"
cells that produce bone and cartilage from one mouse to another.

   The findings may open new avenues for gene therapy in treating human
illnesses such as "brittle bone" disease, dwarfism, osteoporosis and
osteoarthritis, they said in an article in Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences.

   Using a complex procedure similar to a blood transfusion, researchers at
Jefferson Medical College in Philadelphia said they found that precursor cells
transplanted from donor mice replaced between 3 and 10 per cent of bone and
cartilage cells in other mice one to five months after injection.

   The researchers said this development may enable scientists to correct or
compensate for the genetic flaws that produce symptoms of the aforementioned
diseases.


LOAD-DATE: May 24, 1995


                              133 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1995 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                     March 20, 1995, Monday, METRO EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 648 words

HEADLINE: 'Gene gun' blasts DNA dust into cells to help fight cancer

BYLINE: By Joseph Hall Toronto Star

BODY:

   The war against cancer may soon be waged with real guns.

   Indeed, an experimental air pistol that shoots DNA-covered gold dust into
live body cells may prove to be one of the most effective weapons devised to
battle the disease, doctors told an American Association for Cancer Research
meeting in Toronto yesterday.

   "It's very promising," says Ning-Sun Yang, a University of Wisconsin
scientist who helped develop the "gene gun" technology, which tries to make the
tumor appear more foreign so the immune system attacks it.

   "We are able to load microscopic gold particles coated with DNA or other
biological materials, which may serve as therapeutic genes for either cancer or
other diseases," he said.

   The DNA, which sticks to the gold particles like flour to a glass, is shot
directly into live cells where it will code the production of cancer-fighting
proteins called cytokines.

   Released naturally from the invaded cell like other protein particles, the
cytokines act like a magnet, drawing white blood cells to attack the
foreign-looking cancerous tumors wherever they appear in the body.

   "Using (this) gun we've actually seen some animals become tumor-free," says
Dr. Wenn Sun, a member of the University of Wisconsin and Agracetus
biotechnology company team that developed the gun, which evolved from a design
used for vaccinations.

   While the gun has so far been used solely on rodents, it does not appear to
cause them excessive pain, Yang says, adding that broken cell membranes re-close
within minutes.

   Human trials are awaiting U.S. Food and Drug Administration approval.

   The gun, which has a barrel and a trigger, is pressed against the body and
blasts high-pressure helium through cartridges coated with microscopic gold
particles. It smashes them at near super-sonic speeds through cell membranes in
the skin.

   Once inside the cell, the DNA strands migrate to the nucleus, where natural
DNA is busy manufacturing the proteins specific to skin functions.

   "Cytokines and the genes coding for it are cellular immune modulators which .
. . sometimes activate different immune cell systems," Yang says.

   "In the vicinity of the tumor (these work to) generate either a short-term
inflammatory response or . . . tumor specific killing response."

   While the gold particles - each about one millionth of a metre in diameter -
are fired into skin cells nearest the tumor, they need not actually enter the
malignancy to be effective, Yang says.

   "Limited numbers may reach the tumor cells, although the great majority are
only reaching the (normal) skin cells which secrete the cytokines," Yang says.

   "And then this secreted or released cytokines can stimulate and augment the
immune response surrounding the tumor, which . . . later on kills or later on
prevents further tumor growth."

   Gold is used because it is biologically inert and will not react with the
tissue it has invaded, Yang says.

   "Gold also has a very high physical density and according to the laws of
physics, when it's accelerated at high speed it creates higher momentum and
therefore would penetrate deeper into the target tissue and you have to use less
shock waves as a propelling force."

   Currently, the majority of gene therapy experiments require tumor cells be
removed from patients. These cells are then grown in a laboratory, genetically
modified with viruses, killed with radiation to keep them from spreading and
re-injected into the patient.

   But by smashing it directly into a cell, the gene gun allows the DNA to
bypass the receptors that guard cellular membranes and often block its entry.

   The gold particles can also carry far longer strands of DNA than a viral
host.

   More than 5,000 cancer specialists are gathering at the Metro Toronto
Convention Centre until tomorrow1 for the association's three-day convention.

   See related story (Page A20)

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 1999


                              134 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1995 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                     March 20, 1995, Monday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 642 words

HEADLINE: 'Gene gun' blasts DNA dust into cells to help fight cancer

BYLINE: BY JOSEPH HALL TORONTO STAR

BODY:


    The war against cancer may soon be waged with real guns.

   Indeed, an experimental air pistol that shoots DNA-covered gold dust into
live body cells may prove to be one of the most effective weapons devised to
battle the disease, doctors told an American Association for Cancer Research
meeting in Toronto yesterday.

   "It's very promising," says Ning-Sun Yang, a University of Wisconsin
scientist who helped develop the "gene gun" technology, which tries to make the
tumor appear more foreign so the immune system attacks it.

   "We are able to load microscopic gold particles coated with DNA or other
biological materials, which may serve as therapeutic genes for either cancer or
other diseases," he said.

   The DNA, which sticks to the gold particles like flour to a glass, is shot
directly into live cells where it will code the production of cancer-fighting
proteins called cytokines.

   Released naturally from the invaded cell like other protein particles, the
cytokines act like a magnet, drawing white blood cells to attack the
foreign-looking cancerous tumors wherever they appear in the body.

   "Using (this) gun we've actually seen some animals become tumor-free," says
Dr. Wenn Sun, a member of the University of Wisconsin and Agracetus
biotechnology company team that developed the gun, which evolved from a design
used for vaccinations.

   While the gun has so far been used solely on rodents, it does not appear to
cause them excessive pain, Yang says, adding that broken cell membranes re-close
within minutes.

   Human trials are awaiting U.S. Food and Drug Administration approval.

   The gun, which has a barrel and a trigger, is pressed against the body and
blasts high-pressure helium through cartridges coated with microscopic gold
particles. It smashes them at near super-sonic speeds through cell membranes in
the skin.

   Once inside the cell, the DNA strands migrate to the nucleus, where natural
DNA is busy manufacturing the proteins specific to skin functions.

   "Cytokines and the genes coding for it are cellular immune modulators which .
. . sometimes activate different immune cell systems," Yang says.

   "In the vicinity of the tumor (these work to) generate either a short-term
inflammatory response or . . . tumor specific killing response."

   While the gold particles - each about one millionth of a metre in diameter -
are fired into skin cells nearest the tumor, they need not actually enter the
malignancy to be effective, Yang says.

   "Limited numbers may reach the tumor cells, although the great majority are
only reaching the (normal) skin cells which secrete the cytokines," Yang says.

   "And then this secreted or released cytokines can stimulate and augment the
immune response surrounding the tumor, which . . . later on kills or later on
prevents further tumor growth."

   Gold is used because it is biologically inert and will not react with the
tissue it has invaded, Yang says.

   "Gold also has a very high physical density and according to the laws of
physics, when it's accelerated at high speed it creates higher momentum and
therefore would penetrate deeper into the target tissue and you have to use less
shock waves as a propelling force."

   Currently, the majority of gene therapy experiments require tumor cells be
removed from patients. These cells are then grown in a laboratory, genetically
modified with viruses, killed with radiation to keep them from spreading and
re-injected into the patient.

   But by smashing it directly into a cell, the gene gun allows the DNA to
bypass the receptors that guard cellular membranes and often block its entry.

   The gold particles can also carry far longer strands of DNA than a viral
host.

   More than 5,000 cancer specialists are gathering at the Metro Toronto
Convention Centre until tomorrow1 for the association's three-day convention.


LOAD-DATE: March 21, 1995


                              135 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1995 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                    January 5, 1995, Thursday, METRO EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. B7

LENGTH: 478 words

HEADLINE: Cystic fibrosis gene therapy shows promise

BYLINE: By Dan Hurley SPECIAL TO THE STAR

BODY:

   In a milestone for gene therapy, a drop of fat has been successfully used to
carry the working copy of a crucial gene into the nose lining of cystic fibrosis
patients, according to London researchers.

   When normal copies of the gene were slipped into a drop of fat and dribbled
into the noses of eight cystic fibrosis patients, none suffered complications.
Within a few days, the gene appeared to have slightly improved a cellular defect
that causes the disease in seven of them.

   All traces of the gene disappeared within a week. However, the study brings
researchers closer to the goal of using genes as drugs, Nature Medicine reports
.

   Robert Beall, president of the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation in Bethesda, Md.,
called the study a milestone in scientists' efforts to deliver gene therapy to
cells that have genetic mutations.

   He predicts that within two to three years, the "ultimate" way to sneak genes
into the airway cells of cystic fibrosis patients will be developed and ready
for testing.

   Eventually, Beall says, the treatment might work for up to three months or
longer and could be repeated as necessary.

   Cystic fibrosis is a fatal inherited disorder. The lungs develop a salt
buildup, which causes thick mucus to accumulate. Average life expectancy is 28
years.

   When the gene mutation that causes cystic fibrosis was discovered 3 1/2 years
ago, researchers began searching for ways to place a normal version of the gene
into the lungs.

   Doctors have already managed to slip normal copies of the gene into cold
viruses and have dribbled a virus-filled liquid into patients' lungs.

   But doctors feared that cystic fibrosis patients will develop antibodies to
the altered cold viruses and become immune to them, just as they would to a
normal cold virus.

   The viruses have also caused an inflammatory response in the lungs of some
patients, similar to pneumonia.

   To get around those problems, researchers have been testing the idea of using
a liposome, ordinarily known as a simple drop of fat.

   Because the lining of all cells are made up primarily of liposomes,
researchers have been hoping that a drop of fat containing millions of copies of
a gene would coalesce on to the surface of a cell long enough for the genes to
sneak inside the cell and begin producing the missing protein that can cure
cystic fibrosis.

   The new study was led by Natasha Caplen of the department of biochemistry and
molecular genetics at St. Mary's Hospital Medical School in London.

   It involved 15 cystic fibrosis patients. In seven of the eight patients who
received the normal gene, she found signs of the gene within the patients' cells
and a "modest" improvement in their condition.

   Other studies are about to begin in the U.S. on an improved fat droplet that
is 50 times more effective in getting genes into airway cells, Beall says.

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 1999


                              136 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1995 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                    January 5, 1995, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. B7

LENGTH: 477 words

HEADLINE: Cystic fibrosis gene therapy shows promise

BYLINE: BY DAN HURLEY SPECIAL TO THE STAR

BODY:


    In a milestone for gene therapy, a drop of fat has been successfully used to
carry the working copy of a crucial gene into the nose lining of cystic fibrosis
patients, according to London researchers.

   When normal copies of the gene were slipped into a drop of fat and dribbled
into the noses of eight cystic fibrosis patients, none suffered complications.
Within a few days, the gene appeared to have slightly improved a cellular defect
that causes the disease in seven of them.

   All traces of the gene disappeared within a week. However, the study brings
researchers closer to the goal of using genes as drugs, Nature Medicine reports
.

   Robert Beall, president of the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation in Bethesda, Md.,
called the study a milestone in scientists' efforts to deliver gene therapy to
cells that have genetic mutations.

   He predicts that within two to three years, the "ultimate" way to sneak genes
into the airway cells of cystic fibrosis patients will be developed and ready
for testing.

   Eventually, Beall says, the treatment might work for up to three months or
longer and could be repeated as necessary.

   Cystic fibrosis is a fatal inherited disorder. The lungs develop a salt
buildup, which causes thick mucus to accumulate. Average life expectancy is 28
years.

   When the gene mutation that causes cystic fibrosis was discovered 3 1/2 years
ago, researchers began searching for ways to place a normal version of the gene
into the lungs.

   Doctors have already managed to slip normal copies of the gene into cold
viruses and have dribbled a virus-filled liquid into patients' lungs.

   But doctors feared that cystic fibrosis patients will develop antibodies to
the altered cold viruses and become immune to them, just as they would to a
normal cold virus.

   The viruses have also caused an inflammatory response in the lungs of some
patients, similar to pneumonia.

   To get around those problems, researchers have been testing the idea of using
a liposome, ordinarily known as a simple drop of fat.

   Because the lining of all cells are made up primarily of liposomes,
researchers have been hoping that a drop of fat containing millions of copies of
a gene would coalesce on to the surface of a cell long enough for the genes to
sneak inside the cell and begin producing the missing protein that can cure
cystic fibrosis.

   The new study was led by Natasha Caplen of the department of biochemistry and
molecular genetics at St. Mary's Hospital Medical School in London.

   It involved 15 cystic fibrosis patients. In seven of the eight patients who
received the normal gene, she found signs of the gene within the patients' cells
and a "modest" improvement in their condition.

   Other studies are about to begin in the U.S. on an improved fat droplet that
is 50 times more effective in getting genes into airway cells, Beall says.


LOAD-DATE: January 6, 1995


                              137 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1994 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                    August 11, 1994, Thursday, METRO EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A2

LENGTH: 406 words

HEADLINE: AIDS research targets newborns New genes aimed at killing virus

BYLINE: AP-CP

DATELINE: YOKOHAMA, Japan

BODY:

   YOKOHAMA, Japan (AP-CP) - Newborns infected with AIDS will be among the first
to receive its most dramatic new treatment - genetic manipulation that arms
blood cells with a virus-killing protein, researchers say.

   Scientists laid out strategies yesterday at the 10th International Conference
on AIDS.

   These mostly involve inserting protective new genes into the blood cells that
HIV - the virus believed to cause AIDS - infects. These genes would combat HIV
by producing substances to disrupt the virus' internal workings.

   HIV kills by taking over a variety of critical white cells called helpers. It
turns them into virus factories and then destroys them.

   Among the gene therapy approaches that appears to be closest to actual use is
one for newborns developed by Dr. Flossie Wong-Staal and colleagues at the
University of California in San Diego.

   She said she hopes to begin testing it on infected babies within a year and
eventually develop a simple AIDS treatment that can be given in a single
injection.

   "This might seem like an unreachable goal right now, but we should bear in
mind that gene therapy is a rapidly developing field," she said.

   Wong-Staal's approach is aimed at babies who get HIV from their mothers
during birth.

   Doctors would remove blood from the umbilical cord that connected the baby to
its mother. The blood contains stem cells, which ordinarily live in the bone
marrow and make new blood cells.

   Next, they give these stem cells a new gene, one isolated from a virus that
infects tobacco plants. This gene produces an enzyme called a hairpin ribozyme.
It destroys the RNA - a genetic material that governs life processes - that HIV
uses for its own genes.

   The gene-altered stem cells are injected into the baby, where they continue
to make white blood cells containing the ribozyme gene. If one of these new
cells is attacked by the AIDS virus, the gene would prevent it from becoming
established, making new copies of itself and eventually killing the cell.

   David Garmaise, executive director of the Canadian AIDS Society who's at the
conference, said yesterday more Canadian researchers should be working in the
AIDS and HIV fields.

   He said one way is for the federal government to give scholarships to young
researchers. Garmaise said while Canada has one of the highest per-capita rates
of HIV infection among the G-7 countries, it ranks seventh in research spending.

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 1999


                              138 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1994 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                    August 11, 1994, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A2

LENGTH: 401 words

HEADLINE: AIDS research targets newborns New genes aimed at killing virus

BYLINE: AP-CP

DATELINE: YOKOHAMA, JapanAIDS RESEARCH INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE

BODY:

   Newborns infected with AIDS will be among the first to receive its most
dramatic new treatment - genetic manipulation that arms blood cells with a
virus-killing protein, researchers say.

   Scientists laid out strategies yesterday at the 10th International Conference
on AIDS.

   These mostly involve inserting protective new genes into the blood cells that
HIV - the virus believed to cause AIDS - infects. These genes would combat HIV
by producing substances to disrupt the virus' internal workings.

   HIV kills by taking over a variety of critical white cells called helpers. It
turns them into virus factories and then destroys them.

   Among the gene therapy approaches that appears to be closest to actual use is
one for newborns developed by Dr. Flossie Wong-Staal and colleagues at the
University of California in San Diego.

   She said she hopes to begin testing it on infected babies within a year and
eventually develop a simple AIDS treatment that can be given in a single
injection.

   "This might seem like an unreachable goal right now, but we should bear in
mind that gene therapy is a rapidly developing field," she said.

   Wong-Staal's approach is aimed at babies who get HIV from their mothers
during birth.

   Doctors would remove blood from the umbilical cord that connected the baby to
its mother. The blood contains stem cells, which ordinarily live in the bone
marrow and make new blood cells.

   Next, they give these stem cells a new gene, one isolated from a virus that
infects tobacco plants. This gene produces an enzyme called a hairpin ribozyme.
It destroys the RNA - a genetic material that governs life processes - that HIV
uses for its own genes.

   The gene-altered stem cells are injected into the baby, where they continue
to make white blood cells containing the ribozyme gene. If one of these new
cells is attacked by the AIDS virus, the gene would prevent it from becoming
established, making new copies of itself and eventually killing the cell.

   David Garmaise, executive director of the Canadian AIDS Society who's at the
conference, said yesterday more Canadian researchers should be working in the
AIDS and HIV fields.

   He said one way is for the federal government to give scholarships to young
researchers. Garmaise said while Canada has one of the highest per-capita rates
of HIV infection among the G-7 countries, it ranks seventh in research spending.


LOAD-DATE: August 12, 1994


                              139 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1994 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                    August 11, 1994, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A2

LENGTH: 401 words

HEADLINE: AIDS research targets newborns New genes aimed at killing virus

BYLINE: AP-CP

DATELINE: YOKOHAMA, JapanAIDS RESEARCH INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE

BODY:

   Newborns infected with AIDS will be among the first to receive its most
dramatic new treatment - genetic manipulation that arms blood cells with a
virus-killing protein, researchers say.

   Scientists laid out strategies yesterday at the 10th International Conference
on AIDS.

   These mostly involve inserting protective new genes into the blood cells that
HIV - the virus believed to cause AIDS - infects. These genes would combat HIV
by producing substances to disrupt the virus' internal workings.

   HIV kills by taking over a variety of critical white cells called helpers. It
turns them into virus factories and then destroys them.

   Among the gene therapy approaches that appears to be closest to actual use is
one for newborns developed by Dr. Flossie Wong-Staal and colleagues at the
University of California in San Diego.

   She said she hopes to begin testing it on infected babies within a year and
eventually develop a simple AIDS treatment that can be given in a single
injection.

   "This might seem like an unreachable goal right now, but we should bear in
mind that gene therapy is a rapidly developing field," she said.

   Wong-Staal's approach is aimed at babies who get HIV from their mothers
during birth.

   Doctors would remove blood from the umbilical cord that connected the baby to
its mother. The blood contains stem cells, which ordinarily live in the bone
marrow and make new blood cells.

   Next, they give these stem cells a new gene, one isolated from a virus that
infects tobacco plants. This gene produces an enzyme called a hairpin ribozyme.
It destroys the RNA - a genetic material that governs life processes - that HIV
uses for its own genes.

   The gene-altered stem cells are injected into the baby, where they continue
to make white blood cells containing the ribozyme gene. If one of these new
cells is attacked by the AIDS virus, the gene would prevent it from becoming
established, making new copies of itself and eventually killing the cell.

   David Garmaise, executive director of the Canadian AIDS Society who's at the
conference, said yesterday more Canadian researchers should be working in the
AIDS and HIV fields.

   He said one way is for the federal government to give scholarships to young
researchers. Garmaise said while Canada has one of the highest per-capita rates
of HIV infection among the G-7 countries, it ranks seventh in research spending.


LOAD-DATE: August 12, 1994


                              140 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1994 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

               August 6, 1994, Saturday, SATURDAY SECOND EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A8

LENGTH: 485 words

HEADLINE: Grant supports long hunt to find fatal genetic flaw Search for
child-killing syndrome may pay off soon

BYLINE: by Jim Foster TORONTO STAR

BODY:

   Six years of medical detective work could pay off soon - maybe this year - in
the hunt for an elusive child-killer.

   A genetic flaw called Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome (W.A.S.) wrecks boys' immune
systems and usually kills them before they are 10.

   North America's main diagnostic and research centre for the disease is in
Toronto's Mount Sinai Hospital, where Dr. Kathy Siminovitch compares searching
for the bad gene to "finding a pin on a football field."

   But her team found genetic "markers," signposts on the chromosome that some
boys inherit along with the defect underlying W .A .S. That focused the search.

   "Now we are very close to isolating the gene," Siminovitch says. "But even
when you're this close, you're still hunting for a pin inside the 10-yard line."

   When the villain is found and its effects explained, she hopes W.A.S. can be
cured by gene therapy - inserting a good copy of the gene into cells to
reproduce normally in the body.

   W.A.S. is an uncommon disease that frequently escapes diagnosis. There are no
reliable statistics on how often it strikes, but Siminovitch's work has shown
that it's not nearly so rare as doctors used to think.

   Her lab tests sometimes cover two dozen members of one extended family.

   Women who carry the flaw in their X chromosomes show no ill effects, but
their sons stand a 50-50 chance of developing severe eczema, recurrent bleeding
and infections, and certain cancers. Daughters stand a 50-50 chance of becoming
carriers in turn.

   Siminovitch has been dipping into her research money to run a diagnostic and
counselling service for families that pass on the defect.

   Since Ontario's health ministry doesn't fund that kind of work, the Atkinson
Charitable Foundation provided $26,000 last year so she can continue testing a
new patient every week or so for both diagnosis and research.

   Over-all, the foundation gave $316,700 to 13 institutions for medical
research, nurses' training, hospital building projects and special programs.

   Siminovitch can diagnose W.A.S. from blood samples or amniotic fluid in the
womb. She tells the mother-to-be if a baby son will be affected and whether a
baby daughter will carry the W .A .S . gene.

   Some baby boys are saved by bone marrow transplants. But irreversible
complications, such as cancer, frequently set in before a suitable donor can be
found.

   The main hope of Siminovitch, an associate professor in the University of
Toronto's departments of immunology and molecular and medical genetics, is that
gene therapy can cure these boys once the gene is isolated.

   "At present there is little gene therapy in Canada; we've been somewhat slow
in that area," she says.

   "This therapy provides potential for cure and would therefore be very
cost-effective. We hope the technologies for delivering gene therapy become
widely available here soon."

   See related articles pp.A1,A8

GRAPHIC: Star photo (ANDRREW STAWICKI) ELUSIVE QUARRY: Dr. Kathy Siminovitch and
technologist Amro Shehabeldin are hunting a bad gene.

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 1999


                              141 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1994 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                    August 6, 1994, Saturday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A8

LENGTH: 469 words

HEADLINE: Grant supports long hunt to find fatal genetic flaw Search for
child-killing syndrome may pay off soon

BYLINE: BY JIM FOSTER TORONTO STARATKINSON CHARITABLE FOUNDATION GENETICS
RESEARCH TORONTO MOUNT SINAI HOSPITAL

BODY:

   maybe this year - in the hunt for an elusive child-killer.

   A genetic flaw called Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome (W.A.S.) wrecks boys' immune
systems and usually kills them before they are 10.

   North America's main diagnostic and research centre for the disease is in
Toronto's Mount Sinai Hospital, where Dr. Kathy Siminovitch compares searching
for the bad gene to "finding a pin on a football field."

   But her team found genetic "markers," signposts on the chromosome that some
boys inherit along with the defect underlying W .A .S. That focused the search.

   "Now we are very close to isolating the gene," Siminovitch says. "But even
when you're this close, you're still hunting for a pin inside the 10-yard line."

   When the villain is found and its effects explained, she hopes W.A.S. can be
cured by gene therapy - inserting a good copy of the gene into cells to
reproduce normally in the body.

   W.A.S. is an uncommon disease that frequently escapes diagnosis. There are no
reliable statistics on how often it strikes, but Siminovitch's work has shown
that it's not nearly so rare as doctors used to think.

   Her lab tests sometimes cover two dozen members of one extended family.

   Women who carry the flaw in their X chromosomes show no ill effects, but
their sons stand a 50-50 chance of developing severe eczema, recurrent bleeding
and infections, and certain cancers. Daughters stand a 50-50 chance of becoming
carriers in turn.

   Siminovitch has been dipping into her research money to run a diagnostic and
counselling service for families that pass on the defect.

   Since Ontario's health ministry doesn't fund that kind of work, the Atkinson
Charitable Foundation provided $ 26,000 last year so she can continue testing a
new patient every week or so for both diagnosis and research.

   Over-all, the foundation gave $ 316,700 to 13 institutions for medical
research, nurses' training, hospital building projects and special programs.

   Siminovitch can diagnose W.A.S. from blood samples or amniotic fluid in the
womb. She tells the mother-to-be if a baby son will be affected and whether a
baby daughter will carry the W .A .S . gene.

   Some baby boys are saved by bone marrow transplants. But irreversible
complications, such as cancer, frequently set in before a suitable donor can be
found.

   The main hope of Siminovitch, an associate professor in the University of
Toronto's departments of immunology and molecular and medical genetics, is that
gene therapy can cure these boys once the gene is isolated.

   "At present there is little gene therapy in Canada; we've been somewhat slow
in that area," she says.

   "This therapy provides potential for cure and would therefore be very
cost-effective. We hope the technologies for delivering gene therapy become
widely available here soon."


GRAPHIC: Star photo (ANDRREW STAWICKI) ELUSIVE QUARRY: Dr. Kathy Siminovitch and
technologist Amro Shehabeldin are hunting a bad gene.

LOAD-DATE: August 8, 1994


                              142 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1994 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                    August 6, 1994, Saturday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A8

LENGTH: 469 words

HEADLINE: Grant supports long hunt to find fatal genetic flaw Search for
child-killing syndrome may pay off soon

BYLINE: BY JIM FOSTER TORONTO STARATKINSON CHARITABLE FOUNDATION GENETICS
RESEARCH TORONTO MOUNT SINAI HOSPITAL

BODY:

   maybe this year - in the hunt for an elusive child-killer.

   A genetic flaw called Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome (W.A.S.) wrecks boys' immune
systems and usually kills them before they are 10.

   North America's main diagnostic and research centre for the disease is in
Toronto's Mount Sinai Hospital, where Dr. Kathy Siminovitch compares searching
for the bad gene to "finding a pin on a football field."

   But her team found genetic "markers," signposts on the chromosome that some
boys inherit along with the defect underlying W .A .S. That focused the search.

   "Now we are very close to isolating the gene," Siminovitch says. "But even
when you're this close, you're still hunting for a pin inside the 10-yard line."

   When the villain is found and its effects explained, she hopes W.A.S. can be
cured by gene therapy - inserting a good copy of the gene into cells to
reproduce normally in the body.

   W.A.S. is an uncommon disease that frequently escapes diagnosis. There are no
reliable statistics on how often it strikes, but Siminovitch's work has shown
that it's not nearly so rare as doctors used to think.

   Her lab tests sometimes cover two dozen members of one extended family.

   Women who carry the flaw in their X chromosomes show no ill effects, but
their sons stand a 50-50 chance of developing severe eczema, recurrent bleeding
and infections, and certain cancers. Daughters stand a 50-50 chance of becoming
carriers in turn.

   Siminovitch has been dipping into her research money to run a diagnostic and
counselling service for families that pass on the defect.

   Since Ontario's health ministry doesn't fund that kind of work, the Atkinson
Charitable Foundation provided $ 26,000 last year so she can continue testing a
new patient every week or so for both diagnosis and research.

   Over-all, the foundation gave $ 316,700 to 13 institutions for medical
research, nurses' training, hospital building projects and special programs.

   Siminovitch can diagnose W.A.S. from blood samples or amniotic fluid in the
womb. She tells the mother-to-be if a baby son will be affected and whether a
baby daughter will carry the W .A .S . gene.

   Some baby boys are saved by bone marrow transplants. But irreversible
complications, such as cancer, frequently set in before a suitable donor can be
found.

   The main hope of Siminovitch, an associate professor in the University of
Toronto's departments of immunology and molecular and medical genetics, is that
gene therapy can cure these boys once the gene is isolated.

   "At present there is little gene therapy in Canada; we've been somewhat slow
in that area," she says.

   "This therapy provides potential for cure and would therefore be very
cost-effective. We hope the technologies for delivering gene therapy become
widely available here soon."


GRAPHIC: Star photo (ANDRREW STAWICKI) ELUSIVE QUARRY: Dr. Kathy Siminovitch and
technologist Amro Shehabeldin are hunting a bad gene.

LOAD-DATE: August 8, 1994


                              143 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1994 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                   May 1, 1994, Sunday, SUNDAY SECOND EDITION

SECTION: CONTEXT; Pg. D10

LENGTH: 473 words

HEADLINE: Dr. Kilobyte leads the way in medicine

BODY:

   MOBILE OPERATING rooms will drive to ailing patients. Robo-docs will assist
in surgery. Bad genes will be fixed with drugs.

   That's not sci-fi speculation, experts say. Those medical advances will be
routine by 2010. And they will come at a good time, helping governments to
control rising health costs as they provide care for an older, more demanding
population.

   In fact, many information-hungry consumers will be doing much of their own
medicine as they contact their physician through personal computers, electronic
mail and teleconferencing.

   So-called "smart computer doctors" will be able to diagnose ailments and
determine the best treatment for patients by drawing on a personal medical
profile.

   Cumbersome medical records will be a thing of the past as health-care workers
will retrieve the patient's records from computers through the patient's
password or a Smart Card.

   An electronic chart will be linked to pharmacies, laboratories and hospitals,
all of which will feed data into the system.

   This high-tech age will also creep into operating rooms. The bloody
"hands-in" surgery of the late 20th century could well become as outdated as the
crude surgery practised before anesthesia and antiseptic operating theatres
became commonplace. For example:

   * Powerful computers will give surgeons x-ray vision with patients appearing
as transparent, three-dimensional models, complete with flesh and bones. With
the help of a 3-D x-ray, doctors will operate while watching the
three-dimensional image of the patient that moves when the patient does.

   * "Trackless" surgery (surgery without cutting) will be increasingly used to
remove some tumors, especially breast and brain tumors. The tumor will be mapped
by imaging sensors and then destroyed with a zap of ultrasound.

   * Patients undergoing most surgeries will leave one of several bedless
hospitals in Metro the same day. In some cases, they will be cared for by the
fleet of ambulances that tour remote areas deprived of surgical facilities.

   Although the technology is expensive, much of the cost will be offset by the
closing of hospitals and the reduced number of health-care workers, which
account for the bulk of health-care spending.

   There will also be a shift in emphasis to prevention. Doctors will have found
new ways to correct most single-gene defects, such as hemophilia, with the use
of gene therapy. And clinical trial results on an AIDS vaccine should just be
coming to the fore.

   People will still be doing everything they can to prevent heart disease,
cancer and stroke - eating wisely, exercising and boning up on all the latest
news on vitamins.

   In future health, however, the Apple a day that keeps the doctor away is more
likely to be a personal computer.

   related articles pp.  A1,B12,C1,D1,D3,D5,D6,D7,D8,D10,D12,E1,F1.

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 1999


                              144 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1994 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                       May 1, 1994, Sunday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: CONTEXT; Pg. D10

LENGTH: 462 words

HEADLINE: Dr. Kilobyte leads the way in medicine

BODY:


    MOBILE OPERATING rooms will drive to ailing patients. Robo-docs will assist
in surgery. Bad genes will be fixed with drugs.

   That's not sci-fi speculation, experts say. Those medical advances will be
routine by 2010. And they will come at a good time, helping governments to
control rising health costs as they provide care for an older, more demanding
population.

   In fact, many information-hungry consumers will be doing much of their own
medicine as they contact their physician through personal computers, electronic
mail and teleconferencing.

   So-called "smart computer doctors" will be able to diagnose ailments and
determine the best treatment for patients by drawing on a personal medical
profile.

   Cumbersome medical records will be a thing of the past as health-care workers
will retrieve the patient's records from computers through the patient's
password or a Smart Card.

   An electronic chart will be linked to pharmacies, laboratories and hospitals,
all of which will feed data into the system.

   This high-tech age will also creep into operating rooms. The bloody
"hands-in" surgery of the late 20th century could well become as outdated as the
crude surgery practised before anesthesia and antiseptic operating theatres
became commonplace. For example:

   * Powerful computers will give surgeons x-ray vision with patients appearing
as transparent, three-dimensional models, complete with flesh and bones. With
the help of a 3-D x-ray, doctors will operate while watching the
three-dimensional image of the patient that moves when the patient does.

   * "Trackless" surgery (surgery without cutting) will be increasingly used to
remove some tumors, especially breast and brain tumors. The tumor will be mapped
by imaging sensors and then destroyed with a zap of ultrasound.

   * Patients undergoing most surgeries will leave one of several bedless
hospitals in Metro the same day. In some cases, they will be cared for by the
fleet of ambulances that tour remote areas deprived of surgical facilities.

   Although the technology is expensive, much of the cost will be offset by the
closing of hospitals and the reduced number of health-care workers, which
account for the bulk of health-care spending.

   There will also be a shift in emphasis to prevention. Doctors will have found
new ways to correct most single-gene defects, such as hemophilia, with the use
of gene therapy. And clinical trial results on an AIDS vaccine should just be
coming to the fore.

   People will still be doing everything they can to prevent heart disease,
cancer and stroke - eating wisely, exercising and boning up on all the latest
news on vitamins.

   In future health, however, the Apple a day that keeps the doctor away is more
likely to be a personal computer.


LOAD-DATE: May 2, 1994


                              145 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1994 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                       May 1, 1994, Sunday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: CONTEXT; Pg. D10

LENGTH: 462 words

HEADLINE: Dr. Kilobyte leads the way in medicine

BODY:


    MOBILE OPERATING rooms will drive to ailing patients. Robo-docs will assist
in surgery. Bad genes will be fixed with drugs.

   That's not sci-fi speculation, experts say. Those medical advances will be
routine by 2010. And they will come at a good time, helping governments to
control rising health costs as they provide care for an older, more demanding
population.

   In fact, many information-hungry consumers will be doing much of their own
medicine as they contact their physician through personal computers, electronic
mail and teleconferencing.

   So-called "smart computer doctors" will be able to diagnose ailments and
determine the best treatment for patients by drawing on a personal medical
profile.

   Cumbersome medical records will be a thing of the past as health-care workers
will retrieve the patient's records from computers through the patient's
password or a Smart Card.

   An electronic chart will be linked to pharmacies, laboratories and hospitals,
all of which will feed data into the system.

   This high-tech age will also creep into operating rooms. The bloody
"hands-in" surgery of the late 20th century could well become as outdated as the
crude surgery practised before anesthesia and antiseptic operating theatres
became commonplace. For example:

   * Powerful computers will give surgeons x-ray vision with patients appearing
as transparent, three-dimensional models, complete with flesh and bones. With
the help of a 3-D x-ray, doctors will operate while watching the
three-dimensional image of the patient that moves when the patient does.

   * "Trackless" surgery (surgery without cutting) will be increasingly used to
remove some tumors, especially breast and brain tumors. The tumor will be mapped
by imaging sensors and then destroyed with a zap of ultrasound.

   * Patients undergoing most surgeries will leave one of several bedless
hospitals in Metro the same day. In some cases, they will be cared for by the
fleet of ambulances that tour remote areas deprived of surgical facilities.

   Although the technology is expensive, much of the cost will be offset by the
closing of hospitals and the reduced number of health-care workers, which
account for the bulk of health-care spending.

   There will also be a shift in emphasis to prevention. Doctors will have found
new ways to correct most single-gene defects, such as hemophilia, with the use
of gene therapy. And clinical trial results on an AIDS vaccine should just be
coming to the fore.

   People will still be doing everything they can to prevent heart disease,
cancer and stroke - eating wisely, exercising and boning up on all the latest
news on vitamins.

   In future health, however, the Apple a day that keeps the doctor away is more
likely to be a personal computer.


LOAD-DATE: May 2, 1994


                              146 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1994 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                      April 8, 1994, Friday, METRO EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A15

LENGTH: 233 words

HEADLINE: 'Designer sperm' sparks outrage

BYLINE: Reuter

DATELINE: LONDON

BODY:

   LONDON (Reuter) - Two U.S. scientists have applied for a European patent for
genetically engineered "designer sperm" that would allow a father to pass only
"healthy" genes to his children, a British magazine reports.

   New Scientist said yesterday the patent application has provoked outrage and
concern on both sides of the Atlantic because it raises the spectre of eugenics
- using science to "improve" the human race.

   It quoted an official at the European Patent Office as saying it's the first
attempt to patent a technique for human germ-line therapy - treatment to pass
down altered genetic traits for generations.

   Most gene therapy concentrates on changing genes only in individual patients
to cure them of diseases.

   But Ralph Brinster and Jim Zimmerman of the University of Pennsylvania's
veterinary school want to patent a process to genetically modify the cells that
become sperm, New Scientist said.

   It said they removed the spermatogonia - the primitive cells that evolve into
sperm - from mice, altered them to eliminate genetic defects and then replaced
them in the testes.

   They said the technique would work equally well in humans.

   "I'm shocked at (the university's) willingness to see the human application
of this technology," said Doris Zallen, a member of the U.S. Recombinant DNA
Advisory Committee, which evaluates proposals for gene therapy experiments.

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 1999


                              147 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1994 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                     March 11, 1994, Friday, METRO EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A22

LENGTH: 204 words

HEADLINE: Genetic defect identified by Sick Kids researchers

BODY:

   Hospital for Sick Children doctors have identified the genetic defect that
causes a rare disease of the immune system, according to research published in
today's 1scientific journal Cell.

   Dr. Chaim Roifman, chief immunologist at the Hospital for Sick Children,
found that children with CD8 deficiency, a severe combined immune deficiency
syndrome, are missing a key protein.

   The protein, called Zap-70, "is absolutely essential for the development of
CD8 blood cells required to fight infection," the lead researcher said.

   Children with the rare CD8 deficiency - which affects about 1 in 50,000
infants - do not produce enough CD8 white blood cells to fight infection,
Roifman said.

   Babies usually don't show symptoms of the disease until they are about 6
months old because their mothers transmit some degree of immunity.

   "After that, they must get a bone marrow transplant. No one can live without
an immune system."

   Only one in four such children finds a "matching sibling donor" for the
marrow transplant, Roifman said, so this new discovery opens the door for gene
therapy.

   The defect is most prevalent in the Mennonite community but Roifman knows of
at least 15 cases outside that community.

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 1999


                              148 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1994 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                     March 11, 1994, Friday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A22

LENGTH: 204 words

HEADLINE: Genetic defect identified by Sick Kids researchers

BODY:


    Hospital for Sick Children doctors have identified the genetic defect that
causes a rare disease of the immune system, according to research published in
today's 1scientific journal Cell.

   Dr. Chaim Roifman, chief immunologist at the Hospital for Sick Children,
found that children with CD8 deficiency, a severe combined immune deficiency
syndrome, are missing a key protein.

   The protein, called Zap-70, "is absolutely essential for the development of
CD8 blood cells required to fight infection," the lead researcher said.

   Children with the rare CD8 deficiency - which affects about 1 in 50,000
infants - do not produce enough CD8 white blood cells to fight infection,
Roifman said.

   Babies usually don't show symptoms of the disease until they are about 6
months old because their mothers transmit some degree of immunity.

   "After that, they must get a bone marrow transplant. No one can live without
an immune system."

   Only one in four such children finds a "matching sibling donor" for the
marrow transplant, Roifman said, so this new discovery opens the door for gene
therapy.

   The defect is most prevalent in the Mennonite community but Roifman knows of
at least 15 cases outside that community.


LOAD-DATE: March 12, 1994


                              149 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1994 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                     March 11, 1994, Friday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A22

LENGTH: 204 words

HEADLINE: Genetic defect identified by Sick Kids researchers

BODY:


    Hospital for Sick Children doctors have identified the genetic defect that
causes a rare disease of the immune system, according to research published in
today's 1scientific journal Cell.

   Dr. Chaim Roifman, chief immunologist at the Hospital for Sick Children,
found that children with CD8 deficiency, a severe combined immune deficiency
syndrome, are missing a key protein.

   The protein, called Zap-70, "is absolutely essential for the development of
CD8 blood cells required to fight infection," the lead researcher said.

   Children with the rare CD8 deficiency - which affects about 1 in 50,000
infants - do not produce enough CD8 white blood cells to fight infection,
Roifman said.

   Babies usually don't show symptoms of the disease until they are about 6
months old because their mothers transmit some degree of immunity.

   "After that, they must get a bone marrow transplant. No one can live without
an immune system."

   Only one in four such children finds a "matching sibling donor" for the
marrow transplant, Roifman said, so this new discovery opens the door for gene
therapy.

   The defect is most prevalent in the Mennonite community but Roifman knows of
at least 15 cases outside that community.


LOAD-DATE: March 12, 1994


                              150 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1994 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                January 30, 1994, Sunday, SUNDAY SECOND EDITION

SECTION: FYI; Pg. D3

LENGTH: 748 words

HEADLINE: Medical breakthroughs in next 40 years

BODY:

   A world of medical miracles is being created every day in laboratories and
hospitals. In the next decade alone, we can expect technology that will allow
parents to choose the sex of their child before pregnancy, drugs that will
prevent breast cancer and we'll be able to reverse baldness by immunization.
These are just a few of the predictions brought into focus by Dr. Jeffrey A.
Fisher in his book RX 2000 Breakthroughs in health, medicine, and longevity by
the year 2000 and beyond. The following timeline charts just some of the medical
advances expected over the next 40 years:

   1997

   Buying and selling of live organs legalized.

   Unprecedented move designed to alleviate organ shortage for transplant and
circumvent unscrupulous "organ brokers." Will be closely regulated and tax
deductible.

   The end of dentures.

   New titanium implants and better computer design allow for permanent
replacement of teeth.

   Most eyeglasses no longer necessary.

   Laser sculpting of cornea eliminates 75 per cent of nearsightedness.

   1998

   Birth control vaccine prevents pregnancy for an entire year.

   The ultimate contraceptive, only one injection of anti-hCG (human chorionic
gonadotropin) required.

   Jet-lag treatment becomes portable.

   Lighting units for resetting biological clocks now compact and lightweight.
Used by international travellers, mobile night-shift workers (police officers,
truckers.)

   1999

   Baldness reversed by transplanting hair follicles grown in the laboratory.

   No more painful and unnatural hair "plugs." Abundant supply for those who
didn't get baldness-treatment drugs soon enough.

   2000

   Masters' power.

   Fifty-year-old man runs mile in under four minutes for first time.

   Bones weakened by osteoporosis rebuilt.

   Substance developed by biotechnology mimics parathyroid hormone, safely
increases bone mass and strength.

   2001

   Aging slowed by new vitamins.

   Called PQQ and BH4, interfere with cell's genetic clock; will be available
for purchase within 10 years.

   Birth control pill for males finally arrives.

   Regulates level of testosterone, and therefore sperm production, without
affecting libido.

   2002

   No more wrinkles.

   Artificial skin, previously used for burn patients, improved and now
indistinguishable from natural. Used for cosmetic purposes.

   Euthanasia legalized.

   Political pressure from aging baby-boomers forces decision.

   2003

   Transplantation gains from an unlikely source.

   Use of animal organs, called zenographs, made possible by the new
anti-rejection drugs that allows for interspecies organ sharing.

   2004

   Mother-child bonding hormone clarified.

   Identification of specific part of oxytocin molecule opens door for amazing
parental options.

   2005

   Artificial pancreas perfected.

   Insulin-producing and insulin-secreting cells successfully tested in animals
and humans. Ready for routine clinical use. Expected to markedly reduce diabetic
complications.

   2007

   Extending the limits of human lifespan.

   Multiple mechanisms of aging well-understood, including genetic ones.
Intervention will lead to human living well beyond 120 years.

   2008

   Buying body parts off the shelf.

   Totally implantable artificial kidneys, livers, pancreases, bought
over-the-counter and coated with recipient's genetic code.

   2009

   At last! Colds can be prevented.

   Polyvalent vaccine (against most common cold-causing viruses) prevents 80 per
cent of colds. Better antiviral drugs available for treatment, but short
duration of colds makes use impractical.

   2011

   Coronary bypass surgery decreased by 95 per cent.

   Molecular biology and genetic therapy prevent most cases; others treated as
outpatients.

   2013

   Bionic athletes.

   Artificial knees, ligaments and muscles for professional athletes introduced.
With capabilities superior to natural versions, promise to change sports.

   2015

   The ultimate separation of sex and reproduction.

   Introduction of artificial placenta, combined with in vitro fertilization,
allows for reproduction from conception to birth completely outside human body.

   2020

   Incidence of all cancer decreased by 80 per cent.

   Cancer death rate decreased by 90 per cent.

   2030

   Coronary disease, cancer effectively wiped out.

   Cases are so rare now newsworthy. Incidence, death rate down 99 per cent.

   Maximum human life-span increased to 150 years.

   Scientists predict more manipulation of genetic clocks to increase lifespan
to greater than 200 years by 2050.

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 1999


                              151 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1994 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                    January 30, 1994, Sunday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: FYI; Pg. D3

LENGTH: 748 words

HEADLINE: Medical breakthroughs in next 40 years

BODY:


    A world of medical miracles is being created every day in laboratories and
hospitals. In the next decade alone, we can expect technology that will allow
parents to choose the sex of their child before pregnancy, drugs that will
prevent breast cancer and we'll be able to reverse baldness by immunization.
These are just a few of the predictions brought into focus by Dr. Jeffrey A.
Fisher in his book RX 2000 Breakthroughs in health, medicine, and longevity by
the year 2000 and beyond. The following timeline charts just some of the medical
advances expected over the next 40 years:

   1997

   Buying and selling of live organs legalized.

   Unprecedented move designed to alleviate organ shortage for transplant and
circumvent unscrupulous "organ brokers." Will be closely regulated and tax
deductible.

   The end of dentures.

   New titanium implants and better computer design allow for permanent
replacement of teeth.

   Most eyeglasses no longer necessary.

   Laser sculpting of cornea eliminates 75 per cent of nearsightedness.

   1998

   Birth control vaccine prevents pregnancy for an entire year.

   The ultimate contraceptive, only one injection of anti-hCG (human chorionic
gonadotropin) required.

   Jet-lag treatment becomes portable.

   Lighting units for resetting biological clocks now compact and lightweight.
Used by international travellers, mobile night-shift workers (police officers,
truckers.)

   1999

   Baldness reversed by transplanting hair follicles grown in the laboratory.

   No more painful and unnatural hair "plugs." Abundant supply for those who
didn't get baldness-treatment drugs soon enough.

   2000

   Masters' power.

   Fifty-year-old man runs mile in under four minutes for first time.

   Bones weakened by osteoporosis rebuilt.

   Substance developed by biotechnology mimics parathyroid hormone, safely
increases bone mass and strength.

   2001

   Aging slowed by new vitamins.

   Called PQQ and BH4, interfere with cell's genetic clock; will be available
for purchase within 10 years.

   Birth control pill for males finally arrives.

   Regulates level of testosterone, and therefore sperm production, without
affecting libido.

   2002

   No more wrinkles.

   Artificial skin, previously used for burn patients, improved and now
indistinguishable from natural. Used for cosmetic purposes.

   Euthanasia legalized.

   Political pressure from aging baby-boomers forces decision.

   2003

   Transplantation gains from an unlikely source.

   Use of animal organs, called zenographs, made possible by the new
anti-rejection drugs that allows for interspecies organ sharing.

   2004

   Mother-child bonding hormone clarified.

   Identification of specific part of oxytocin molecule opens door for amazing
parental options.

   2005

   Artificial pancreas perfected.

   Insulin-producing and insulin-secreting cells successfully tested in animals
and humans. Ready for routine clinical use. Expected to markedly reduce diabetic
complications.

   2007

   Extending the limits of human lifespan.

   Multiple mechanisms of aging well-understood, including genetic ones.
Intervention will lead to human living well beyond 120 years.

   2008

   Buying body parts off the shelf.

   Totally implantable artificial kidneys, livers, pancreases, bought
over-the-counter and coated with recipient's genetic code.

   2009

   At last! Colds can be prevented.

   Polyvalent vaccine (against most common cold-causing viruses) prevents 80 per
cent of colds. Better antiviral drugs available for treatment, but short
duration of colds makes use impractical.

   2011

   Coronary bypass surgery decreased by 95 per cent.

   Molecular biology and genetic therapy prevent most cases; others treated as
outpatients.

   2013

   Bionic athletes.

   Artificial knees, ligaments and muscles for professional athletes introduced.
With capabilities superior to natural versions, promise to change sports.

   2015

   The ultimate separation of sex and reproduction.

   Introduction of artificial placenta, combined with in vitro fertilization,
allows for reproduction from conception to birth completely outside human body.

   2020

   Incidence of all cancer decreased by 80 per cent.

   Cancer death rate decreased by 90 per cent.

   2030

   Coronary disease, cancer effectively wiped out.

   Cases are so rare now newsworthy. Incidence, death rate down 99 per cent.

   Maximum human life-span increased to 150 years.

   Scientists predict more manipulation of genetic clocks to increase lifespan
to greater than 200 years by 2050.


LOAD-DATE: January 31, 1994


                              152 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1994 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                    January 30, 1994, Sunday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: FYI; Pg. D3

LENGTH: 748 words

HEADLINE: Medical breakthroughs in next 40 years

BODY:


    A world of medical miracles is being created every day in laboratories and
hospitals. In the next decade alone, we can expect technology that will allow
parents to choose the sex of their child before pregnancy, drugs that will
prevent breast cancer and we'll be able to reverse baldness by immunization.
These are just a few of the predictions brought into focus by Dr. Jeffrey A.
Fisher in his book RX 2000 Breakthroughs in health, medicine, and longevity by
the year 2000 and beyond. The following timeline charts just some of the medical
advances expected over the next 40 years:

   1997

   Buying and selling of live organs legalized.

   Unprecedented move designed to alleviate organ shortage for transplant and
circumvent unscrupulous "organ brokers." Will be closely regulated and tax
deductible.

   The end of dentures.

   New titanium implants and better computer design allow for permanent
replacement of teeth.

   Most eyeglasses no longer necessary.

   Laser sculpting of cornea eliminates 75 per cent of nearsightedness.

   1998

   Birth control vaccine prevents pregnancy for an entire year.

   The ultimate contraceptive, only one injection of anti-hCG (human chorionic
gonadotropin) required.

   Jet-lag treatment becomes portable.

   Lighting units for resetting biological clocks now compact and lightweight.
Used by international travellers, mobile night-shift workers (police officers,
truckers.)

   1999

   Baldness reversed by transplanting hair follicles grown in the laboratory.

   No more painful and unnatural hair "plugs." Abundant supply for those who
didn't get baldness-treatment drugs soon enough.

   2000

   Masters' power.

   Fifty-year-old man runs mile in under four minutes for first time.

   Bones weakened by osteoporosis rebuilt.

   Substance developed by biotechnology mimics parathyroid hormone, safely
increases bone mass and strength.

   2001

   Aging slowed by new vitamins.

   Called PQQ and BH4, interfere with cell's genetic clock; will be available
for purchase within 10 years.

   Birth control pill for males finally arrives.

   Regulates level of testosterone, and therefore sperm production, without
affecting libido.

   2002

   No more wrinkles.

   Artificial skin, previously used for burn patients, improved and now
indistinguishable from natural. Used for cosmetic purposes.

   Euthanasia legalized.

   Political pressure from aging baby-boomers forces decision.

   2003

   Transplantation gains from an unlikely source.

   Use of animal organs, called zenographs, made possible by the new
anti-rejection drugs that allows for interspecies organ sharing.

   2004

   Mother-child bonding hormone clarified.

   Identification of specific part of oxytocin molecule opens door for amazing
parental options.

   2005

   Artificial pancreas perfected.

   Insulin-producing and insulin-secreting cells successfully tested in animals
and humans. Ready for routine clinical use. Expected to markedly reduce diabetic
complications.

   2007

   Extending the limits of human lifespan.

   Multiple mechanisms of aging well-understood, including genetic ones.
Intervention will lead to human living well beyond 120 years.

   2008

   Buying body parts off the shelf.

   Totally implantable artificial kidneys, livers, pancreases, bought
over-the-counter and coated with recipient's genetic code.

   2009

   At last! Colds can be prevented.

   Polyvalent vaccine (against most common cold-causing viruses) prevents 80 per
cent of colds. Better antiviral drugs available for treatment, but short
duration of colds makes use impractical.

   2011

   Coronary bypass surgery decreased by 95 per cent.

   Molecular biology and genetic therapy prevent most cases; others treated as
outpatients.

   2013

   Bionic athletes.

   Artificial knees, ligaments and muscles for professional athletes introduced.
With capabilities superior to natural versions, promise to change sports.

   2015

   The ultimate separation of sex and reproduction.

   Introduction of artificial placenta, combined with in vitro fertilization,
allows for reproduction from conception to birth completely outside human body.

   2020

   Incidence of all cancer decreased by 80 per cent.

   Cancer death rate decreased by 90 per cent.

   2030

   Coronary disease, cancer effectively wiped out.

   Cases are so rare now newsworthy. Incidence, death rate down 99 per cent.

   Maximum human life-span increased to 150 years.

   Scientists predict more manipulation of genetic clocks to increase lifespan
to greater than 200 years by 2050.


LOAD-DATE: January 31, 1994


                              153 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1993 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                    December 6, 1993, Monday, METRO EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. C2

LENGTH: 625 words

HEADLINE: Calgary baby makes genetic history

BYLINE: By Margaret Munro Special to The Star (SouthamStar Network)

BODY:

   An international team of doctors is monitoring the progress of a Calgary baby
whose genes were reprogrammed in a historic experiment.

   The experiment, the first of its type ever performed on a Canadian, is aimed
at curing the child of a deadly genetic disease inherited from his parents.

   The procedure was done in June in California as part of an experiment that
also involved two Americans.

   But while the American infants were featured in Time magazine and news
stories and programs around the world, the fact that a Canadian child had the
same procedure was not made public.

   Dr. Tom Bowen, a blood specialist at the Alberta Children's Hospital in
Calgary, who arranged the treatment for the Alberta child, says he "elected not
to have a big publicity spiel about it" because he didn't want to raise false
expectations in families waiting for gene therapy.

   Bowen says the Alberta child's parents learned though prenatal testing that
their baby had a rare and deadly immune disorder that kills most victims before
they reach their first birthday.

   The disorder is caused by a defective gene that prevents production of an
enzyme known as adenosine deaminase (ADA), which rids the bloodstream of toxic
substances.

   Minutes after the Calgary baby was born in June, Bowen says a few millilitres
of blood was taken from his umbilical cord.

   Bowen then popped the vial of blood, which contained a solution to prevent
clotting, into his coat pocket and headed to the airport, catching the first
available flight to Los Angeles.

   He was met by California researcher Dr. Kenneth Weinberg and they headed for
the lab, beginning the intricate work of inserting new genes into the child's
faulty blood cells.

   Bowen didn't leave the lab till 7 a.m.

   The cells had to incubate for three days, giving Bowen a chance to take in a
baseball game and eat a few hot dogs. Then the cells were poured into a
test-tube. Bowen put it in his pocket and boarded a plane for Calgary.

   The altered cells were dripped into the infant's vein later that day and at 5
days old he became part of medical history.

   The precedent-setting case of gene therapy speaks volumes about a technology
that is racing ahead, crossing international boundaries and turning natural
order on its ear.

   The only people aware of the experiment with the Canadian baby were a few
medical officials, doctors and government regulators. And the infant's family,
who want their child to remain anonymous.

   The experiment on the Alberta child was approved by the Alberta Children's
Hospital, the University of Calgary bioethics committee and the federal health
department.

   Medical researchers see the experiments with the three babies as the
beginning of many of possible applications for gene therapy for thousands of
other infants.

   Bowen says the Alberta parents decided their child's best chance for a normal
life was to undergo experimental therapy being pioneered by California
researchers.

   The result was the first attempt to insert an ADA gene into stem cells found
in infants' blood cells. The stem cells, which are the parents of all other
blood cells, continually spawn new cells.

   By inserting the missing gene into the stem cells, the treatment is designed
to cure. The idea is that the repaired stem cells will lodge in the bone marrow
and produce healthy blood cells for the rest of the persons life.

   In the meantime, the boy is receiving twice-weekly injections of a drug that
costs as much as $300,000 a year. If the gene therapy doesn't work, he will have
to take the drug for the rest of his life. Either that or get a bone marrow
transplant.

   Bowen says the baby looks great and is doing fine. The two American babies
are also doing well.

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 1999


                              154 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1993 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                    December 6, 1993, Monday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. C2

LENGTH: 624 words

HEADLINE: Calgary baby makes genetic history

BYLINE: BY MARGARET MUNRO SPECIAL TO THE STAR (SOUTHAMSTAR NETWORK)ALBERTA
GENETICS CANADA FIRST

BODY:


    An international team of doctors is monitoring the progress of a Calgary
baby whose genes were reprogrammed in a historic experiment.

   The experiment, the first of its type ever performed on a Canadian, is aimed
at curing the child of a deadly genetic disease inherited from his parents.

   The procedure was done in June in California as part of an experiment that
also involved two Americans.

   But while the American infants were featured in Time magazine and news
stories and programs around the world, the fact that a Canadian child had the
same procedure was not made public.

   Dr. Tom Bowen, a blood specialist at the Alberta Children's Hospital in
Calgary, who arranged the treatment for the Alberta child, says he "elected not
to have a big publicity spiel about it" because he didn't want to raise false
expectations in families waiting for gene therapy.

   Bowen says the Alberta child's parents learned though prenatal testing that
their baby had a rare and deadly immune disorder that kills most victims before
they reach their first birthday.

   The disorder is caused by a defective gene that prevents production of an
enzyme known as adenosine deaminase (ADA), which rids the bloodstream of toxic
substances.

   Minutes after the Calgary baby was born in June, Bowen says a few millilitres
of blood was taken from his umbilical cord.

   Bowen then popped the vial of blood, which contained a solution to prevent
clotting, into his coat pocket and headed to the airport, catching the first
available flight to Los Angeles.

   He was met by California researcher Dr. Kenneth Weinberg and they headed for
the lab, beginning the intricate work of inserting new genes into the child's
faulty blood cells.

   Bowen didn't leave the lab till 7 a.m.

   The cells had to incubate for three days, giving Bowen a chance to take in a
baseball game and eat a few hot dogs. Then the cells were poured into a
test-tube. Bowen put it in his pocket and boarded a plane for Calgary.

   The altered cells were dripped into the infant's vein later that day and at 5
days old he became part of medical history.

   The precedent-setting case of gene therapy speaks volumes about a technology
that is racing ahead, crossing international boundaries and turning natural
order on its ear.

   The only people aware of the experiment with the Canadian baby were a few
medical officials, doctors and government regulators. And the infant's family,
who want their child to remain anonymous.

   The experiment on the Alberta child was approved by the Alberta Children's
Hospital, the University of Calgary bioethics committee and the federal health
department.

   Medical researchers see the experiments with the three babies as the
beginning of many of possible applications for gene therapy for thousands of
other infants.

   Bowen says the Alberta parents decided their child's best chance for a normal
life was to undergo experimental therapy being pioneered by California
researchers.

   The result was the first attempt to insert an ADA gene into stem cells found
in infants' blood cells. The stem cells, which are the parents of all other
blood cells, continually spawn new cells.

   By inserting the missing gene into the stem cells, the treatment is designed
to cure. The idea is that the repaired stem cells will lodge in the bone marrow
and produce healthy blood cells for the rest of the persons life.

   In the meantime, the boy is receiving twice-weekly injections of a drug that
costs as much as $ 300,000 a year. If the gene therapy doesn't work, he will
have to take the drug for the rest of his life. Either that or get a bone marrow
transplant.

   Bowen says the baby looks great and is doing fine. The two American babies
are also doing well.


LOAD-DATE: December 7, 1993


                              155 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1993 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

              October 16, 1993, Saturday, SATURDAY SECOND EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. K2

LENGTH: 1125 words

HEADLINE: Hope for hemophiliacs in experimental therapy

BYLINE: By Marilyn Dunlop

BODY:

   For the first time, gene therapy has been used to provide long-term treatment
of one kind of hemophilia in dogs. The achievement by a team of U.S. scientists
has been hailed as a significant step toward using gene therapy in people with
the bleeding disorder.

   Their work was reported in the journal Science: A gene that makes a clotting
factor, known as factor IX, was injected into the livers of hemophiliac dogs.
Afterwards, the animals produced factor IX for more than eight months.

   Current therapies to stop bleeding last only a few days, the report says.

   "This is the first time hemophilia has been partially corrected," says Dr.
Kenneth Brinkhouse of the School of Medicine at the University of North
Carolina, Chapel Hill. "If the treatment is eventually effective in human beings
with hemophilia, it would allow them to lead relatively normal lives."

   Patients would need to be treated only every few months.

   The dogs had hemophilia B. In humans, about one in 30,000 males has
hemophilia B (it primarily affects males). The condition causes spontaneous
bleeding, often in the joints, that is extremely painful and can be crippling.

   Replacing even a small amount of the missing clotting factor in the
hemophiliac dogs produced a dramatic reduction in the time it took for their
blood to clot, notes the head of the research team, Dr. Savio Woo of Baylor
College of Medicine, Houston.

   Auto-immune disorders studied at new centre A unique centre dedicated to the
study of immune diseases, particularly auto-immune disorders, has been
established at Wellesley Hospital on Sherbourne St.

   The hospital says it has the largest patient data base on auto-immunity in
Canada. The information has been collected over the past 25 years, during which
the hospital has been Canada's leading centre of care and research in arthritis
diseases. Some of these, such as rheumatoid arthritis and lupus, are among the
more than 50 diseases known to have an auto-immune basis.

   In auto-immune diseases, white cells designed to defend the body mistakenly
attack normal tissue.

   The director of the new Arthritis and Autoimmunity Research Centre is Dr.
Christopher Paige, an immunologist. He has recruited a team of scientists with
expertise in a variety of fields.

   "Wellesley researchers are attacking the problem of auto-immune disease on
every front, from prevention to the very newest treatments," Paige says.

   Private clinic opening for head-injury patients A private clinic for people
who have suffered severe head injuries in motor accidents will open this fall in
Toronto.

   The Columbia Centre for Neuro-Rehabilitation at University Ave. and Dundas
St. is allied with nearby Queen Elizabeth Hospital, a leading rehabilitation
hospital. Medically stable patients will be able to leave Queen Elizabeth
Hospital sooner and receive specialized care as outpatients at the new centre.

   Treatment will be paid for by private insurance rather than the Ontario
Health Insurance Plan, according to William Brown, chief executive officer of
Columbia Health Care Inc. The company owns the new centre. It also operates 16
other pain and sports injury clinics and occupational health centres in Ontario.

   "There are not enough facilities in Canada to accommodate people with severe
brain injuries once they reach medical stability and many have been going to the
United States at incredible expense to the public or insurance sectors," Brown
says.

   Under the Ontario Motorists Protection Plan, people who sustain head injuries
in a motor vehicle accident are eligible for private rehabilitation treatment,
he says. It is these patients who will be treated at the centre.

   Physicians, physiotherapists, speech pathologists, psychologists and other
specialists will be on staff, says a news release from Columbia Health Care Inc.

   Dentists, 3-year-olds get to know each other Many of the 5,000 members of the
Ontario Dental Association are starting a program to introduce 3-year-olds to a
dentist.

   The children visit a dental office and sit in the dental chair. They don't
get their teeth examined. The visit is free.

   "We know that when children go to the dentist at an early age, they often
enjoy it and develop good oral health habits that stay with them for life," says
Dr. George Sweetman, president of the association. "For kids with healthy
smiles, the age of 3 is a good time to develop habits that keep their teeth in
great shape."

   The visit also gives parents an opportunity to discuss the most effective way
of protecting their children's dental health.

   The program begins this month and runs to May, 1994. For more information,
contact your dentist. Or call the association at 922-3900.

   No-scalpel vasectomy introduced in Canada Canadian doctors have begun to use
a no-scalpel vasectomy procedure, according to Canadian Family Physician.

   The procedure, pioneered in China, takes only a few minutes. By means of a
clamp, the vas deferens (a tube that carries sperm) is positioned near the
surface of the skin of the scrotum. Forceps are used to puncture the skin and
make an opening large enough to allow the doctor to pull up the tube and cut,
cauterize or tie it. It is then released into the scrotal sac, leaving no scar.
No stitches are needed. A local anesthetic is used.

   The journal says two Halifax physicians, Dr. Ronald Weiss and Dr. Michel
Labrecque, recently conducted workshops to teach the procedure to family
doctors.

   Study finds no link between vitamin, cancer Vitamin K is routinely injected
into newborns in Canada, the United States and Europe to prevent hemorrhaging.
It has been the accepted procedure for 30 years. Infants lack the intestinal
bacteria needed to produce vitamin K, a substance essential to blood clotting.

   There was great alarm a few years ago when a medical team in Britain
suggested vitamin K injections might increase the risk of childhood cancers. But
doctors are breathing easier now, thanks to a study by the United States
National Institute of Child Health and Human Development.

   Almost 55,000 children, of whom 45 developed cancer before the age of 8, were
studied. No association between vitamin K and any kind of childhood cancer was
found.

   Dr. Mark Klebanoff and colleagues reported their findings in the New England
Journal of Medicine.

   Their report also notes that the incidence of childhood leukemia (the most
common form of cancer in youngsters) did not increase in the United States
between 1948, when almost no children were given vitamin K at birth, and 1980,
when nearly every newborn received it.

   Because of the well-documented benefits of giving newborns vitamin K, there
is no known reason to abandon this practice, the researchers say.

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 1999


                              156 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1993 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                   October 16, 1993, Saturday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. K2

LENGTH: 1124 words

HEADLINE: Hope for hemophiliacs in experimental therapy

BYLINE: BY MARILYN DUNLOPWHAT'S NEW IN MEDICINE

BODY:


    For the first time, gene therapy has been used to provide long-term
treatment of one kind of hemophilia in dogs. The achievement by a team of U.S.
scientists has been hailed as a significant step toward using gene therapy in
people with the bleeding disorder.

   Their work was reported in the journal Science: A gene that makes a clotting
factor, known as factor IX, was injected into the livers of hemophiliac dogs.
Afterwards, the animals produced factor IX for more than eight months.

   Current therapies to stop bleeding last only a few days, the report says.

   "This is the first time hemophilia has been partially corrected," says Dr.
Kenneth Brinkhouse of the School of Medicine at the University of North
Carolina, Chapel Hill. "If the treatment is eventually effective in human beings
with hemophilia, it would allow them to lead relatively normal lives."

   Patients would need to be treated only every few months.

   The dogs had hemophilia B. In humans, about one in 30,000 males has
hemophilia B (it primarily affects males). The condition causes spontaneous
bleeding, often in the joints, that is extremely painful and can be crippling.

   Replacing even a small amount of the missing clotting factor in the
hemophiliac dogs produced a dramatic reduction in the time it took for their
blood to clot, notes the head of the research team, Dr. Savio Woo of Baylor
College of Medicine, Houston.

   Auto-immune disorders studied at new centre A unique centre dedicated to the
study of immune diseases, particularly auto-immune disorders, has been
established at Wellesley Hospital on Sherbourne St.

   The hospital says it has the largest patient data base on auto-immunity in
Canada. The information has been collected over the past 25 years, during which
the hospital has been Canada's leading centre of care and research in arthritis
diseases. Some of these, such as rheumatoid arthritis and lupus, are among the
more than 50 diseases known to have an auto-immune basis.

   In auto-immune diseases, white cells designed to defend the body mistakenly
attack normal tissue.

   The director of the new Arthritis and Autoimmunity Research Centre is Dr.
Christopher Paige, an immunologist. He has recruited a team of scientists with
expertise in a variety of fields.

   "Wellesley researchers are attacking the problem of auto-immune disease on
every front, from prevention to the very newest treatments," Paige says.

   Private clinic opening for head-injury patients A private clinic for people
who have suffered severe head injuries in motor accidents will open this fall in
Toronto.

   The Columbia Centre for Neuro-Rehabilitation at University Ave. and Dundas
St. is allied with nearby Queen Elizabeth Hospital, a leading rehabilitation
hospital. Medically stable patients will be able to leave Queen Elizabeth
Hospital sooner and receive specialized care as outpatients at the new centre.

   Treatment will be paid for by private insurance rather than the Ontario
Health Insurance Plan, according to William Brown, chief executive officer of
Columbia Health Care Inc. The company owns the new centre. It also operates 16
other pain and sports injury clinics and occupational health centres in Ontario.

   "There are not enough facilities in Canada to accommodate people with severe
brain injuries once they reach medical stability and many have been going to the
United States at incredible expense to the public or insurance sectors," Brown
says.

   Under the Ontario Motorists Protection Plan, people who sustain head injuries
in a motor vehicle accident are eligible for private rehabilitation treatment,
he says. It is these patients who will be treated at the centre.

   Physicians, physiotherapists, speech pathologists, psychologists and other
specialists will be on staff, says a news release from Columbia Health Care Inc.

   Dentists, 3-year-olds get to know each other Many of the 5,000 members of the
Ontario Dental Association are starting a program to introduce 3-year-olds to a
dentist.

   The children visit a dental office and sit in the dental chair. They don't
get their teeth examined. The visit is free.

   "We know that when children go to the dentist at an early age, they often
enjoy it and develop good oral health habits that stay with them for life," says
Dr. George Sweetman, president of the association. "For kids with healthy
smiles, the age of 3 is a good time to develop habits that keep their teeth in
great shape."

   The visit also gives parents an opportunity to discuss the most effective way
of protecting their children's dental health.

   The program begins this month and runs to May, 1994. For more information,
contact your dentist. Or call the association at 922-3900.

   No-scalpel vasectomy introduced in Canada Canadian doctors have begun to use
a no-scalpel vasectomy procedure, according to Canadian Family Physician.

   The procedure, pioneered in China, takes only a few minutes. By means of a
clamp, the vas deferens (a tube that carries sperm) is positioned near the
surface of the skin of the scrotum. Forceps are used to puncture the skin and
make an opening large enough to allow the doctor to pull up the tube and cut,
cauterize or tie it. It is then released into the scrotal sac, leaving no scar.
No stitches are needed. A local anesthetic is used.

   The journal says two Halifax physicians, Dr. Ronald Weiss and Dr. Michel
Labrecque, recently conducted workshops to teach the procedure to family
doctors.

   Study finds no link between vitamin, cancer Vitamin K is routinely injected
into newborns in Canada, the United States and Europe to prevent hemorrhaging.
It has been the accepted procedure for 30 years. Infants lack the intestinal
bacteria needed to produce vitamin K, a substance essential to blood clotting.

   There was great alarm a few years ago when a medical team in Britain
suggested vitamin K injections might increase the risk of childhood cancers. But
doctors are breathing easier now, thanks to a study by the United States
National Institute of Child Health and Human Development.

   Almost 55,000 children, of whom 45 developed cancer before the age of 8, were
studied. No association between vitamin K and any kind of childhood cancer was
found.

   Dr. Mark Klebanoff and colleagues reported their findings in the New England
Journal of Medicine.

   Their report also notes that the incidence of childhood leukemia (the most
common form of cancer in youngsters) did not increase in the United States
between 1948, when almost no children were given vitamin K at birth, and 1980,
when nearly every newborn received it.

   Because of the well-documented benefits of giving newborns vitamin K, there
is no known reason to abandon this practice, the researchers say.


LOAD-DATE: October 17, 1993


                              157 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1993 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                          October 4, 1993, Monday, AM

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. E3

LENGTH: 299 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy may aid hemophiliacs

BYLINE: (Reuter)

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   WASHINGTON (Reuter) - A new type of gene therapy tested in laboratory animals
may help in the treatment of hemophilia, scientists say.

   "This is the first time that hemophilia has been partially corrected," Dr.
Kenneth Brinkhous, a pioneer in hemophilia research at the University of North
Carolina in Chapel Hill, said in a news release. "If the treatment is eventually
effective in human beings with hemophilia, it would allow them to lead
relatively normal lives."

   Brinkhous and a team of researchers led by Dr. Savio Woo at Baylor College of
Medicine in Houston report in the latest issue of Science magazine on their use
of gene therapy to treat the hereditary disease, which primarily affects males
and results in the failure of liver cells to manufacture a certain
blood-clotting protein.

   Gene therapy pioneer French Anderson told Science in a related article the
research is "so much better than anything that's been done before. It's the
first time there have been significant levels of a clinically important gene
product in a large animal for a significant period."

   By introducing a copy of a gene that produces the blood-clotting protein into
the livers of hemophiliac dogs, the researchers said they were able to improve
by more than 50 per cent the dogs' clotting time.

   The research team, one of a dozen groups trying to develop a gene therapy to
treat hemophilia, was unable to get the dogs' clotting time to normal because
the transferred gene did not make enough of the protein.

   But the scientists expressed optimism over their new study, noting that the
liver kept producing the clotting protein for nine months after the gene was
introduced and that blood clotting times were reduced from 50 minutes before
treatment to 20 minutes after treatment.

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 1999


                              158 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1993 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                     August 30, 1993, Monday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 129 words

HEADLINE: 115-year lifespans predicted

BYLINE: Reuter

DATELINE: LONDON

BODY:

   LONDON (Reuter) - Scientific advances and a healthier lifestyle could mean
people will routinely live to 115 years old, a report to a British scientific
conference said today.

   Oxford University professor Grimley Evans said genetic engineering and a
greater understanding of the body's aging process coupled with more exercising
and a better environment would considerably lengthen lives.

   Evans told the British Association for the Advancement of Science that a key
element would be gene therapy, the technique being developed for many ills from
cystic fibrosis to cancer.

   However, he fears an increasingly aged population will continue to suffer
from strokes, arthritis and other painful ailments, although the onset of such
diseases could be delayed.

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 1999


                              159 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1993 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                 August 8, 1993, Sunday, SUNDAY SECOND EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS TODAY; Pg. H1

LENGTH: 792 words

HEADLINE: Body parts trade is growing business The Human Body Shop by Andrew
Kimbrell HarperCollins, 348 pages, $29.50

BYLINE: By Eileen McMahon

BODY:

   Today, selling or leasing body parts is lucrative. Donating sperm is worth
$50 while donating eggs is worth $2,000. Sales of valuable organs such as
kidneys or hearts can generate up to $50,000. Leasing a womb for months can earn
thousands of dollars.

   Although the trade in human body parts makes business sense, it elicits
different reactions in different people. Some people are repulsed. Others are
tolerant or actively support it. Where do we draw the line between what we can
do and what we should do? Although one-sided, this book asks how far we should
go and provokes a sober second thought on the trade in body parts.

   In many countries of the world, such as Canada, trade in human body parts is
unregulated. Objectively, such trade can be economically rational - in a free
market system, the trade of body parts can help the disadvantaged and the
advantaged. Subjectively, such trade raises difficult ethical issues.

   Such trade is one issue that Andrew Kimbrell explores in his book, The Human
Body Shop.

   Kimbrell's theme is that scientists and the companies which employ them are
poorly equipped to judge ethical issues raised by modern science. He proposes to
ban all trade in human body parts. He also proposes a moratorium on the use of
foetuses for transplantation or research and limits on genetic screening of
foetuses. He recommends banning the use of genetically engineered drugs to treat
certain human traits and the use of gene therapy to treat life-threatening
disease. Kimbrell deals withthe United States experience to date, the current
trade in sperm, eggs and embryos, genetic manipulation and our future options.

   Kimbrell explores the current trade in sperm, eggs, embryos and children to
illustrate that we are unprepared to deal with the ethical issues raised by such
trade. Do donors of sperm or eggs own an embryo resulting from such sperm or
eggs? Does a child developed from such embryo have claims against "parent"
donors?

   Are surrogates who carry an embryo to term, but who are not genetically
related to such embryo, "mothers" with rights of custody or visitation? Is
aborting a child who has a genetic predisposition to obesity, who is male rather
than female, or who has "bad genes" unethical? Although certain of these issues
are being resolved haphazardly in the United States, many of them remain
unresolved in Canada.

   Kimbrell explores the manipulation of human, animal and plants genes to warn
of dire consequences if such manipulation continues uncontrolled. He cites the
development of "freak" animals produced through genetic manipulation.

   Kimbrell also includes an analysis on the patenting of life forms. He
describes how the United States Patent and Trademark Office routinely grants
patents on mammals, such as mice; on higher life forms, such as plants; and on
human genetic sequences and human proteins. (Canada's Patent Office refuses to
grant patents on animals or plants.) He opposes the grant of such patents on the
basis that body parts, plants and animals are not commodities and should not be
owned by any one person.

   Kimbrell describes how we are at a crossroad in our treatment of, and
thoughts about, the human body. The Industrial Age conditioned us to view bodies
as machines and we are at a stage to either accept or reject that approach.

   This book effectively presents the view of opponents of genetic engineering,
in vitro fertilization and other reproductive technologies, and the trade in
body parts of humans, brain-dead humans, and fetal tissue. The book's weakness
is that it is one-sided.

   Certainly, ethical issues are raised by, for example, the use of fetal tissue
to treat humans. However, we cannot ignore the striking improvements reported,
for example, in the symptoms of Parkinson's disease after transplantation of
fetal cells into brains of patients with Parkinson's disease.

   We cannot ignore the happiness of a kidney transplant patient who learns that
a successful kidney transplant will add several years to the patient's life. We
cannot ignore the satisfaction of a willing surrogate mother and willing
adoptive parents in creating a child. We cannot ignore the improvements in the
quality of life that genetically engineered drugs have created. We cannot ignore
the incentive of the patent system to encourage companies to invest millions of
dollars to find cures for or drugs to treat human conditions.

   Nevertheless Kimbrell's book and Kimbrell's perspective is well-researched
and well written. While it is doubtful that the legislature of Canada will
address the difficult issues raised by Kimbrell, the book is valuable reading.

   * Eileen McMahon is a Toronto patent lawyer with Blake, Cassels & Graydon.

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 1999


                              160 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1993 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                 August 1, 1993, Sunday, SUNDAY SECOND EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A2

LENGTH: 322 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy used in cancer cure: MDs

BYLINE: (AP)

DATELINE: MILAN, Italy

BODY:

   MILAN, Italy (AP) - Doctors have cured a woman with a rare form of cancer by
injecting her with genetically engineered white blood cells, researchers said
yesterday.

   They said it was the first successful treatment of its kind, and the results,
if confirmed, could lead to vaccines against a specific kind of cancer.

   But there will be little immediate benefit for most cancer patients,
cautioned Dr. Claudio Bordignon of the Institute of Scientific Research at San
Raffaele Hospital.

   "For the more common forms of tumors we will still need years, but this
technique gives new, valid hopes," he said in announcing his team's results at a
news conference in Milan.

   The patient suffered from a lymphoma believed to be caused by the
Epstein-Barr virus, which causes the more common condition called chronic
fatigue syndrome.

   The treatment worked because the woman's cancer was one of the few caused by
a virus, institute officials said.

   Researchers have been looking at gene therapy to fight cancer with mixed
results.

   The woman developed the tumor in her lymph glands after a bone-marrow
transplant. The disease is rare and most often strikes patients who undergo
transplants, the researchers said.

   She could not be treated with conventional therapies and her prognosis was
extremely poor, so doctors decided to try the gene therapy, Bordignon said.

   Two weeks ago, doctors injected her with lymphocyte T cells drawn from her
brother. Two genes were inserted into the cells, a so-called "suicide gene" and
a "marker gene," Bordignon explained.

   Lymphocytes are cells formed in lymphatic tissue that are important in the
formation of antibodies and the body's defences against infection.

   The lymphocytes attacked and killed the cancer cells. Before they could go on
to attack healthy cells, the "suicide genes" were activated by a drug injected
into the patient and they destroyed the lymphocytes.

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 1999


                              161 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1993 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                     August 1, 1993, Sunday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A2

LENGTH: 318 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy used in cancer cure: MDs

BYLINE: AP)

DATELINE: MILAN, Italy

BODY:

   Doctors have cured a woman with a rare form of cancer by injecting her with
genetically engineered white blood cells, researchers said yesterday.

   They said it was the first successful treatment of its kind, and the results,
if confirmed, could lead to vaccines against a specific kind of cancer.

   But there will be little immediate benefit for most cancer patients,
cautioned Dr. Claudio Bordignon of the Institute of Scientific Research at San
Raffaele Hospital.

   "For the more common forms of tumors we will still need years, but this
technique gives new, valid hopes," he said in announcing his team's results at a
news conference in Milan.

   The patient suffered from a lymphoma believed to be caused by the
Epstein-Barr virus, which causes the more common condition called chronic
fatigue syndrome.

   The treatment worked because the woman's cancer was one of the few caused by
a virus, institute officials said.

   Researchers have been looking at gene therapy to fight cancer with mixed
results.

   The woman developed the tumor in her lymph glands after a bone-marrow
transplant. The disease is rare and most often strikes patients who undergo
transplants, the researchers said.

   She could not be treated with conventional therapies and her prognosis was
extremely poor, so doctors decided to try the gene therapy, Bordignon said.

   Two weeks ago, doctors injected her with lymphocyte T cells drawn from her
brother. Two genes were inserted into the cells, a so-called "suicide gene" and
a "marker gene," Bordignon explained.

   Lymphocytes are cells formed in lymphatic tissue that are important in the
formation of antibodies and the body's defences against infection.

   The lymphocytes attacked and killed the cancer cells. Before they could go on
to attack healthy cells, the "suicide genes" were activated by a drug injected
into the patient and they destroyed the lymphocytes.



LOAD-DATE: August 2, 1993


                              162 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1993 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                  May 30, 1993, Sunday, SUNDAY SECOND EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. G7

LENGTH: 694 words

HEADLINE: Lovell battles for cure of spinal cord injuries with competitive flair

BYLINE: by Mary Ormsby TORONTO STAR

BODY:

   Jocelyn Lovell is as abrasive and rebellious on four wheels as he was on two.

   He questions authority, he challenges convention. He aggressively pursues
options he believes are better than the status quo. He can be astoundingly
blunt, a manner that aggravates those with whom he disagrees.

   He makes people uncomfortable because he dares them.

   Lovell carried that attitude while racing into the record books as Canada's
greatest cyclist. Now in a wheelchair, that attitude remains as he fights for
spinal cord research with the same all-consuming passion that fueled his
cycling.

   It's an all-or-nothing war for Lovell. The slogan of the Spinal Cord Society
he belongs to is "cure not care." Don't squander effort and money making life
comfortable for the paralyzed, just find a cure as fast as possible.

   Lovell has made enemies during this crusade in those who feel that improving
the quality of life for the paralyzed is a valuable pursuit. But that driving,
uncompromising streak in him is what, ultimately, Lovell hopes will allow him
one day to stand and walk away from the chair he hates.

   "I know what people say about me. They say, 'Oh, Jocelyn is bitter, he's
never learned to accept his handicap.' Well, that just makes me laugh," said
Lovell, who was left a quadriplegic after a truck hit him during a 1983 training
session. "I'd be lying if I said being in a wheelchair wasn't a drag.

   "It's hell, it really is. I will hate it from now until the moment I walk
away from it and I believe absolutely that I will walk away from it."

   Some think Lovell is tragically deluding himself. Yet he can't begin to
understand those with spinal cord injuries who have given up.

   "When you get sick, immediately you think about getting well," Lovell said.
"But a spinal cord injury is the only affliction where that old attitude - that
it's a hopeless affliction, that you are confined to a wheelchair for life -
still prevails.

   "The paralyzed community as a whole increases medicine's ability to keep us
alive but not to cure us. Maintenance, how to house us, is the priority, not
cure. That thinking has to change. Without demand, there is no change."

   The change Lovell is looking for is in the immense potential of genetic
engineering.

   The Spinal Cord Society, a Minnesota-based group that has about 10,000
registered members, raises money for medical research. The recent breakthrough
that has the group so excited is that the regeneration of new tissue around the
damaged, scarred spinal cord is a possibility through genetic therapy.

   "We're on the brink of something very big. We couldn't have come into it at a
better time in this age of medical technology with the science of genetic
engineering growing so quickly," Lovell said. "And the important thing is that
we know that genetic engineering is the way to go. But of course, the final
answer is still a many-pieced puzzle that must be solved but we're making
progress."

   As the Canadian co-ordinator of the Spinal Cord Society, Lovell spends
''every waking moment" working on finding a cure from his Mississauga home; he
answers letters with a computer modified for him, he lobbies to get public
service announcements on radio and television and he beats the drum for
charitable donations.

   His latest project took place yesterday at Fort Erie racetrack. He and fellow
Canadian Sports Hall of Famer jockey Ron Turcotte, who was paralyzed after a
1978 spill at Belmont Park, were special guests at a dinner that raised $10,000.
Every cent will go directly to spinal cord research, Lovell said.

   He's now 42 years old, a man with an enormous capacity for work and an
equally enormous capacity for hope.

   "When I was cycling, all I ever wanted to do was the impossible. If they said
it couldn't be done then it was just my cup of tea," he said. "And when you
crossed that finish line first, you did it with a smirk, you tried not to look
like you were breathing hard as everyone would say, 'How did he do that?'

   "What I want to do most of all now is ride my bicycle. I really miss it. But
looking out of the window and dreaming about it won't do now, will it?"

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 1999


                              163 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1993 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                      May 30, 1993, Sunday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. G7

LENGTH: 693 words

HEADLINE: Lovell battles for cure of spinal cord injuries with competitive flair

BYLINE: BY MARY ORMSBY TORONTO STARAT LARGE

BODY:


    Jocelyn Lovell is as abrasive and rebellious on four wheels as he was on
two.

   He questions authority, he challenges convention. He aggressively pursues
options he believes are better than the status quo. He can be astoundingly
blunt, a manner that aggravates those with whom he disagrees.

   He makes people uncomfortable because he dares them.

   Lovell carried that attitude while racing into the record books as Canada's
greatest cyclist. Now in a wheelchair, that attitude remains as he fights for
spinal cord research with the same all-consuming passion that fueled his
cycling.

   It's an all-or-nothing war for Lovell. The slogan of the Spinal Cord Society
he belongs to is "cure not care." Don't squander effort and money making life
comfortable for the paralyzed, just find a cure as fast as possible.

   Lovell has made enemies during this crusade in those who feel that improving
the quality of life for the paralyzed is a valuable pursuit. But that driving,
uncompromising streak in him is what, ultimately, Lovell hopes will allow him
one day to stand and walk away from the chair he hates.

   "I know what people say about me. They say, 'Oh, Jocelyn is bitter, he's
never learned to accept his handicap.' Well, that just makes me laugh," said
Lovell, who was left a quadriplegic after a truck hit him during a 1983 training
session. "I'd be lying if I said being in a wheelchair wasn't a drag.

   "It's hell, it really is. I will hate it from now until the moment I walk
away from it and I believe absolutely that I will walk away from it."

   Some think Lovell is tragically deluding himself. Yet he can't begin to
understand those with spinal cord injuries who have given up.

   "When you get sick, immediately you think about getting well," Lovell said.
"But a spinal cord injury is the only affliction where that old attitude - that
it's a hopeless affliction, that you are confined to a wheelchair for life -
still prevails.

   "The paralyzed community as a whole increases medicine's ability to keep us
alive but not to cure us. Maintenance, how to house us, is the priority, not
cure. That thinking has to change. Without demand, there is no change."

   The change Lovell is looking for is in the immense potential of genetic
engineering.

   The Spinal Cord Society, a Minnesota-based group that has about 10,000
registered members, raises money for medical research. The recent breakthrough
that has the group so excited is that the regeneration of new tissue around the
damaged, scarred spinal cord is a possibility through genetic therapy.

   "We're on the brink of something very big. We couldn't have come into it at a
better time in this age of medical technology with the science of genetic
engineering growing so quickly," Lovell said. "And the important thing is that
we know that genetic engineering is the way to go. But of course, the final
answer is still a many-pieced puzzle that must be solved but we're making
progress."

   As the Canadian co-ordinator of the Spinal Cord Society, Lovell spends "every
waking moment" working on finding a cure from his Mississauga home; he answers
letters with a computer modified for him, he lobbies to get public service
announcements on radio and television and he beats the drum for charitable
donations.

   His latest project took place yesterday at Fort Erie racetrack. He and fellow
Canadian Sports Hall of Famer jockey Ron Turcotte, who was paralyzed after a
1978 spill at Belmont Park, were special guests at a dinner that raised $
10,000. Every cent will go directly to spinal cord research, Lovell said.

   He's now 42 years old, a man with an enormous capacity for work and an
equally enormous capacity for hope.

   "When I was cycling, all I ever wanted to do was the impossible. If they said
it couldn't be done then it was just my cup of tea," he said. "And when you
crossed that finish line first, you did it with a smirk, you tried not to look
like you were breathing hard as everyone would say, 'How did he do that?'

   "What I want to do most of all now is ride my bicycle. I really miss it. But
looking out of the window and dreaming about it won't do now, will it?"


LOAD-DATE: May 31, 1993


                              164 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1993 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                           May 25, 1993, Tuesday, AM

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. B1

LENGTH: 566 words

BODY:

   KITCHENER - Children who sexually abuse other children aren't getting the
therapy they need because society has been slow to recognize the problem, a
children's therapist says. "If we don't do it now, we're going to be drowned
under the number of victims," says Wendy Acton, who runs a therapy group for
young sex offenders. "I don't know how many times I have had school teachers
tell me about the time a group of kids held a girl down and assaulted her." The
stories usually come out as second-hand information and because the facts around
the incident are sketchy, they aren't investigated, Acton told about 100 social
workers at a workshop. Sexual behavior between children can be classed in three
ways, she said: natural curiosity, worrisome behavior or more serious behavior
that should be reported.

   Eyes need protection from UV sun rays

   It's not just the skin that needs protection from the sun, the Ontario
Association of Optometrists says. "Every part of the eye including the eyelids,
lens, cornea and retina may suffer both immediate and long-term damage from
prolonged exposure to sunlight," says association president Dr. Mira Acs.
Because they tend to spend more time outdoors than adults, children and
teenagers are most at risk, says Acs, advising everyone, no matter how old, to
strap on the sunglasses - UV protected, of course - and a wide-brimmed hat.

   Gene therapy helping cystic fibrosis

   NEW YORK - The first two patients to receive human gene therapy for cystic
fibrosis are alive and doing well two months after they underwent the high- tech
treatment. There have been no signs of adverse effects in either patient
following the treatment, which researchers hope will cure the fatal hereditary
disease, said Dr. Ronald Crystal of New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Centre.

   Artificial pancreas testing begins

   LOS ANGELES - Physicians at St. Vincent Medical Centre say they have begun
the first U.S. human trials of an artificial pancreas to treat insulin-dependent
diabetics. The artificial pancreas was implanted earlier this month in the
abdomen of Steven Craig, 38, who has been diabetic for more than 30 years.
Insulin-secreting islet cells from cadavers were implanted encapsulated in a
porous membrane that should keep them safe from an attack by Craig's immune
system. It is hoped that the implanted cells will free him from the need for
daily insulin shots.

   Many fear getting AIDS from transfusion

   WASHINGTON - Half of all Americans fear they can get AIDS through blood
transfusions even though chances of contracting it are extremely small,
according to a Gallup poll conducted for the American Association of Blood
Banks. The poll said fear of AIDS persists even though nearly 8 out of 10 felt
the blood supply is safe.

   Antibiotics useless on some illnesses

   ATLANTA - The world is facing a medical crisis from diseases that have become
resistant to most of the common antibiotic drugs used to treat them, a group of
prominent scientists says. Diseases such as tuberculosis, pneumonia, meningitis,
gonorrhea, and food poisoning can no longer be treated effectively with the wide
array of drugs that have worked for decades, the scientists told the American
Society of Microbiology. The misuse of antibiotics has made them powerless in
treating a variety of common bacteria, the scientists said.

   FROM THE STAR'S NEWS SERVICES

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 1999


                              165 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1993 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                      May 25, 1993, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. B1

LENGTH: 565 words

BODY:

    KITCHENER - Children who sexually abuse other children aren't getting the
therapy they need because society has been slow to recognize the problem, a
children's therapist says. "If we don't do it now, we're going to be drowned
under the number of victims," says Wendy Acton, who runs a therapy group for
young sex offenders. "I don't know how many times I have had school teachers
tell me about the time a group of kids held a girl down and assaulted her." The
stories usually come out as second-hand information and because the facts around
the incident are sketchy, they aren't investigated, Acton told about 100 social
workers at a workshop. Sexual behavior between children can be classed in three
ways, she said: natural curiosity, worrisome behavior or more serious behavior
that should be reported.

   Eyes need protection from UV sun rays

   It's not just the skin that needs protection from the sun, the Ontario
Association of Optometrists says. "Every part of the eye including the eyelids,
lens, cornea and retina may suffer both immediate and long-term damage from
prolonged exposure to sunlight," says association president Dr. Mira Acs.
Because they tend to spend more time outdoors than adults, children and
teenagers are most at risk, says Acs, advising everyone, no matter how old, to
strap on the sunglasses - UV protected, of course - and a wide-brimmed hat.

   Gene therapy helping cystic fibrosis

   NEW YORK - The first two patients to receive human gene therapy for cystic
fibrosis are alive and doing well two months after they underwent the high- tech
treatment. There have been no signs of adverse effects in either patient
following the treatment, which researchers hope will cure the fatal hereditary
disease, said Dr. Ronald Crystal of New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Centre.

   Artificial pancreas testing begins

   LOS ANGELES - Physicians at St. Vincent Medical Centre say they have begun
the first U.S. human trials of an artificial pancreas to treat insulin-dependent
diabetics. The artificial pancreas was implanted earlier this month in the
abdomen of Steven Craig, 38, who has been diabetic for more than 30 years.
Insulin-secreting islet cells from cadavers were implanted encapsulated in a
porous membrane that should keep them safe from an attack by Craig's immune
system. It is hoped that the implanted cells will free him from the need for
daily insulin shots.

   Many fear getting AIDS from transfusion

   WASHINGTON - Half of all Americans fear they can get AIDS through blood
transfusions even though chances of contracting it are extremely small,
according to a Gallup poll conducted for the American Association of Blood
Banks. The poll said fear of AIDS persists even though nearly 8 out of 10 felt
the blood supply is safe.

   Antibiotics useless on some illnesses

   ATLANTA - The world is facing a medical crisis from diseases that have become
resistant to most of the common antibiotic drugs used to treat them, a group of
prominent scientists says. Diseases such as tuberculosis, pneumonia, meningitis,
gonorrhea, and food poisoning can no longer be treated effectively with the wide
array of drugs that have worked for decades, the scientists told the American
Society of Microbiology. The misuse of antibiotics has made them powerless in
treating a variety of common bacteria, the scientists said.

   FROM THE STAR'S NEWS SERVICES


LOAD-DATE: May 26, 1993


                              166 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1993 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

               April 10, 1993, Saturday, SATURDAY SECOND EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. F2

LENGTH: 1069 words

HEADLINE: 'Naked DNA' used in new, improved influenza vaccine

BYLINE: by Marilyn Dunlop

BODY:

   Flu vaccines must be changed from year to year because the strains of
influenza keep changing. But scientists may have discovered a way to make a
vaccine that will protect against several strains, according to reports in the
journal Science.

   Previously, it was believed that a vaccine had to be made using a piece of
virus protein that the immune system could recognize as foreign. Immune cells
then made antibodies against the virus.

   In new studies, researchers have found that inserting into cells "naked DNA"
- a virus gene stripped of virus protein - produced an immune reaction that
protected experimental mice. Immunologist Margaret Lie of Merck Research
Laboratories in West Point, Pa., found that when she infected the mice with
various influenza viruses, they were protected against more than one strain.

   While no one fully understands yet how naked DNA works, over the past year it
has become one of the hottest areas of vaccine research, according to Science.
Research is also under way to try naked DNA in gene therapy for Duschene's
muscular dystrophy and against the human immunodeficiency virus linked to AIDS.

   Ordinary vaccines work by making the immune system produce antibodies that
prevent free-floating viruses cruising around in the body from getting into
cells. The new vaccine appears to work differently. It spurs into action a
different line of immune defence: cells that kill other body cells that have
become infected by viruses.

   "This is one of the most exciting things in modern vaccinology," says Dr.
Maurice Hillman, known as the developer of vaccines against several childhood
diseases.

   However, scientists warn that many safety tests will have to be completed
before naked DNA vaccines could be tested in humans. In particular, scientists
must make sure such vaccines would not trigger cancer.

   Pills hard to swallow

   for some older folks Many older people find it hard to swallow pills. Yet
some tablets or capsules must be taken whole, advises the Canadian
Pharmaceutical Journal.

   Some are coated so they won't cause stomach problems. Some are
"time-released" - designed to give a continuing dosage.

   Do not break, crush, dissolve, suck or chew any tablet or capsule unless your
doctor or pharmacist says this is okay, the journal says.

   Suggestions: Stand up straight while swallowing pills and stay upright for 3
to 5 minutes afterwards so gravity can help a pill move down. Don't tilt your
head back too far while swallowing; this can make it more difficult for a pill
to go down. If your mouth is dry, drink a little water before taking the pill,
then swallow the pill with a full glass of water. If you can't drink a lot of
water or if it feels like the pill is stuck, eat a bit of banana or bread to
help carry it down.

   If nothing works, the journal says, talk to your doctor or pharmacist to see
if your medicine can be taken in a form that is easier to swallow.

   Drug being tested

   eases panic attacks A drug that shows promise of helping people who suffer
from panic attacks is being tested in a clinical trial at Sunnybrook Health
Science Centre.

   The nine-week study, led by Dr. Stan Kutcher, will involve 3,600 people
across Canada.

   Dr. Sharon Reiter, a psychiatrist specializing in anxiety disorders, says a
panic attack strikes out of the blue, causing overwhelming anxiety accompanied
by a sense of fear and impending doom. Symptoms often include a pounding heart,
pain in the chest, shortness of breath and dizziness.

   The drug being tested is moclobemide, which appears to work faster than the
drugs now being used.

   Panic attacks affect about 2 per cent of the population, with the average age
of onset being 19, according to a newsletter from the hospital. Men and women
are equally affected.

   For more information about the study, call Bridgette Ward at 480-6005.

   Kids with cancer

   linked via computer A computer bulletin board started in 1991 for children
and teens with disabilities now includes young persons across Canada who have
cancer.

   It was started by Dr. Arlette Lefebvre, a psychiatrist at the Hospital for
Sick Children, and computer consultant Brian Hillis.

   The newsletter of Candlelighters Childhood Cancer Foundation Canada, a
national volunteer organization for families of children with cancer, explains
how to link up with the electronic mail network AbleLINK.

   Lefebvre has said that some of the most inspirational help for families
facing childhood cancer comes not from medical experts but from other children
and parents, the newsletter notes.

   It adds that one of the patients who began making contacts with other
patients through the system said, "I got better so much faster . . . I didn't
feel so alone. It makes me realize I have friends out there."

   Information about AbleLINK is available from Candlelighters Canada, 10 Alcorn
Ave., Suite 200, Toronto M4V 3B1. Phone: 926-1374.

   Access to equipment

   limited in U.S. High-technology equipment is much more abundant in the United
States than in Canada. That doesn't mean it is always more readily available to
American patients who might benefit most.

   For example, in the U.S. there are some 3,000 magnetic resonance imaging
units (a sophisticated type of diagnostic scanner) - roughly 11 for every
million people. Canada has just 28 - almost one for every million people.

   But a letter from a California doctor in the New England Journal of Medicine
makes the point that access is severely limited for patients with no health
insurance or those covered by Medicaid, a government plan for the poor.

   Dr. Beverly Morgan says Orange Country has 41 MRI centres serving 2.4 million
residents. Morgan called 17 of the centres three times during a three-month
period, posing as three different people.

   When Morgan posed as a patient with full private health insurance who was
referred for a scan because of a minor orthopedic problem, virtually all the
centres offered next-day appointments.

   When Morgan posed as a patient with Medicaid who had a possible brain tumor,
11 of the centres said they did not accept Medicaid patients. The other six said
a scan could be done in two to three weeks if a physician would complete the
paperwork needed for Medicaid authorization.

   When Morgan posed as an uninsured person with no funds but in urgent need of
a scan for a possible brain tumor, none of the centres would accept her.

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 1999


                              167 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1993 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                    April 10, 1993, Saturday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. F2

LENGTH: 1069 words

HEADLINE: 'Naked DNA' used in new, improved influenza vaccine

BYLINE: BY MARILYN DUNLOPWHAT'S NEW IN MEDICINE

BODY:


    Flu vaccines must be changed from year to year because the strains of
influenza keep changing. But scientists may have discovered a way to make a
vaccine that will protect against several strains, according to reports in the
journal Science.

   Previously, it was believed that a vaccine had to be made using a piece of
virus protein that the immune system could recognize as foreign. Immune cells
then made antibodies against the virus.

   In new studies, researchers have found that inserting into cells "naked DNA"
- a virus gene stripped of virus protein - produced an immune reaction that
protected experimental mice. Immunologist Margaret Lie of Merck Research
Laboratories in West Point, Pa., found that when she infected the mice with
various influenza viruses, they were protected against more than one strain.

   While no one fully understands yet how naked DNA works, over the past year it
has become one of the hottest areas of vaccine research, according to Science.
Research is also under way to try naked DNA in gene therapy for Duschene's
muscular dystrophy and against the human immunodeficiency virus linked to AIDS.

   Ordinary vaccines work by making the immune system produce antibodies that
prevent free-floating viruses cruising around in the body from getting into
cells. The new vaccine appears to work differently. It spurs into action a
different line of immune defence: cells that kill other body cells that have
become infected by viruses.

   "This is one of the most exciting things in modern vaccinology," says Dr.
Maurice Hillman, known as the developer of vaccines against several childhood
diseases.

   However, scientists warn that many safety tests will have to be completed
before naked DNA vaccines could be tested in humans. In particular, scientists
must make sure such vaccines would not trigger cancer.

   Pills hard to swallow

   for some older folks Many older people find it hard to swallow pills. Yet
some tablets or capsules must be taken whole, advises the Canadian
Pharmaceutical Journal.

   Some are coated so they won't cause stomach problems. Some are
"time-released" - designed to give a continuing dosage.

   Do not break, crush, dissolve, suck or chew any tablet or capsule unless your
doctor or pharmacist says this is okay, the journal says.

   Suggestions: Stand up straight while swallowing pills and stay upright for 3
to 5 minutes afterwards so gravity can help a pill move down. Don't tilt your
head back too far while swallowing; this can make it more difficult for a pill
to go down. If your mouth is dry, drink a little water before taking the pill,
then swallow the pill with a full glass of water. If you can't drink a lot of
water or if it feels like the pill is stuck, eat a bit of banana or bread to
help carry it down.

   If nothing works, the journal says, talk to your doctor or pharmacist to see
if your medicine can be taken in a form that is easier to swallow.

   Drug being tested

   eases panic attacks A drug that shows promise of helping people who suffer
from panic attacks is being tested in a clinical trial at Sunnybrook Health
Science Centre.

   The nine-week study, led by Dr. Stan Kutcher, will involve 3,600 people
across Canada.

   Dr. Sharon Reiter, a psychiatrist specializing in anxiety disorders, says a
panic attack strikes out of the blue, causing overwhelming anxiety accompanied
by a sense of fear and impending doom. Symptoms often include a pounding heart,
pain in the chest, shortness of breath and dizziness.

   The drug being tested is moclobemide, which appears to work faster than the
drugs now being used.

   Panic attacks affect about 2 per cent of the population, with the average age
of onset being 19, according to a newsletter from the hospital. Men and women
are equally affected.

   For more information about the study, call Bridgette Ward at 480-6005.

   Kids with cancer

   linked via computer A computer bulletin board started in 1991 for children
and teens with disabilities now includes young persons across Canada who have
cancer.

   It was started by Dr. Arlette Lefebvre, a psychiatrist at the Hospital for
Sick Children, and computer consultant Brian Hillis.

   The newsletter of Candlelighters Childhood Cancer Foundation Canada, a
national volunteer organization for families of children with cancer, explains
how to link up with the electronic mail network AbleLINK.

   Lefebvre has said that some of the most inspirational help for families
facing childhood cancer comes not from medical experts but from other children
and parents, the newsletter notes.

   It adds that one of the patients who began making contacts with other
patients through the system said, "I got better so much faster . . . I didn't
feel so alone. It makes me realize I have friends out there."

   Information about AbleLINK is available from Candlelighters Canada, 10 Alcorn
Ave., Suite 200, Toronto M4V 3B1. Phone: 926-1374.

   Access to equipment

   limited in U.S. High-technology equipment is much more abundant in the United
States than in Canada. That doesn't mean it is always more readily available to
American patients who might benefit most.

   For example, in the U.S. there are some 3,000 magnetic resonance imaging
units (a sophisticated type of diagnostic scanner) - roughly 11 for every
million people. Canada has just 28 - almost one for every million people.

   But a letter from a California doctor in the New England Journal of Medicine
makes the point that access is severely limited for patients with no health
insurance or those covered by Medicaid, a government plan for the poor.

   Dr. Beverly Morgan says Orange Country has 41 MRI centres serving 2.4 million
residents. Morgan called 17 of the centres three times during a three-month
period, posing as three different people.

   When Morgan posed as a patient with full private health insurance who was
referred for a scan because of a minor orthopedic problem, virtually all the
centres offered next-day appointments.

   When Morgan posed as a patient with Medicaid who had a possible brain tumor,
11 of the centres said they did not accept Medicaid patients. The other six said
a scan could be done in two to three weeks if a physician would complete the
paperwork needed for Medicaid authorization.

   When Morgan posed as an uninsured person with no funds but in urgent need of
a scan for a possible brain tumor, none of the centres would accept her.


LOAD-DATE: April 11, 1993


                              168 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1993 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                          March 18, 1993, Thursday, AM

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A5

LENGTH: 380 words

HEADLINE: British MDs to reprogram baby girl's cells

BYLINE: (Special) INDEPENDENT NEWS SERVICE

DATELINE: LONDON

BODY:

   LONDON (Special) - A baby girl is expected to make British medical history
today when doctors begin the first gene transplant designed to cure a deficiency
that, untreated, could lead to her death.

   Carly Todd, age 8 months, from a suburb of Glasgow, has the same immune
system deficiency that killed her 14-month-old brother four days before she was
born.

   Children with this rare condition do not make an enzyme called Adenosine
Deaminase, or ADA, which the immune system needs to develop properly.

   Without ADA, Carly is vulnerable to any infection that a baby with normal
cells could fight.

   Doctors at London's Great Ormond St. hospital, working with scientists at the
University of Leiden, in the Netherlands, plan to reprogram Carly's cells so she
can protect herself from infection.

   A copy of the ADA gene will be inserted into the cells of Carly's bone marrow
that are responsible for making the cells of the immune system.

   Dr. Gareth Morgan, a senior lecturer in immunology, described Carly as a
delightful and responsive baby and said he was "cautiously optimistic."

   One Italian and two American children without ADA have been treated with a
different gene therapy, aimed mostly at mature cells. But its effect is short
lived: The cells have a limited life and the treatment must be repeated.

   The British and Dutch technique aims for a lifetime cure, because it's aimed
at stem or progenitor cells.

   Today, Morgan will take about a cupful of Carly's bone marrow from her
pelvis. It will be sent to the laboratory of Dr. Dinko Valerio, in Leiden, where
the stem cells will be harnessed with the ADA gene copies.

   The "incubation" of the newly programmed cells takes about a day and a half.
The gene brew will then be returned to the London hospital.

   In about four days, Carly will be given back the treated cells, probably via
a drip, Morgan said. After two weeks, a series of blood tests will begin to look
for tell- tale chemical changes in the cells from her bone marrow.

   It will take two or three months to determine whether the gene transplant has
worked, he said.

   "We must be realistic. It could be that the cells die off for some reason
inside her body. But we are hopeful this will not happen."

   INDEPENDENT NEWS SERVICE

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 1999


                              169 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1993 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                    March 18, 1993, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A5

LENGTH: 376 words

HEADLINE: British MDs to reprogram baby girl's cells

BYLINE: SPECIAL) INDEPENDENT NEWS SERVICE

DATELINE: LONDON

BODY:

   A baby girl is expected to make British medical history today when doctors
begin the first gene transplant designed to cure a deficiency that, untreated,
could lead to her death.

   Carly Todd, age 8 months, from a suburb of Glasgow, has the same immune
system deficiency that killed her 14-month-old brother four days before she was
born.

   Children with this rare condition do not make an enzyme called Adenosine
Deaminase, or ADA, which the immune system needs to develop properly.

   Without ADA, Carly is vulnerable to any infection that a baby with normal
cells could fight.

   Doctors at London's Great Ormond St. hospital, working with scientists at the
University of Leiden, in the Netherlands, plan to reprogram Carly's cells so she
can protect herself from infection.

   A copy of the ADA gene will be inserted into the cells of Carly's bone marrow
that are responsible for making the cells of the immune system.

   Dr. Gareth Morgan, a senior lecturer in immunology, described Carly as a
delightful and responsive baby and said he was "cautiously optimistic."

   One Italian and two American children without ADA have been treated with a
different gene therapy, aimed mostly at mature cells. But its effect is short
lived: The cells have a limited life and the treatment must be repeated.

   The British and Dutch technique aims for a lifetime cure, because it's aimed
at stem or progenitor cells.

   Today, Morgan will take about a cupful of Carly's bone marrow from her
pelvis. It will be sent to the laboratory of Dr. Dinko Valerio, in Leiden, where
the stem cells will be harnessed with the ADA gene copies.

   The "incubation" of the newly programmed cells takes about a day and a half.
The gene brew will then be returned to the London hospital.

   In about four days, Carly will be given back the treated cells, probably via
a drip, Morgan said. After two weeks, a series of blood tests will begin to look
for tell- tale chemical changes in the cells from her bone marrow.

   It will take two or three months to determine whether the gene transplant has
worked, he said.

   "We must be realistic. It could be that the cells die off for some reason
inside her body. But we are hopeful this will not happen."

   INDEPENDENT NEWS SERVICE



LOAD-DATE: March 20, 1993


                              170 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1993 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                February 28, 1993, Sunday, SUNDAY SECOND EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. B6

LENGTH: 1007 words

HEADLINE: A new era of mdeicine dawns Infusion of genetically altered cells may
cure 6-year-old's fatal illness

BYLINE: By Liz Bowie SPECIAL TO THE STAR

BODY:

   Within weeks, two Maryland doctors will provide a peek at 21st-century
medicine. A girl whose short life has been consumed by the struggle against a
fatal illness will get an infusion of genetically altered cells - in a treatment
so painless that she'll probably be watching one of her favorite videos, maybe
The Little Mermaid, during the procedure.

   If the treatment works, the girl will be cured in a matter of months.

   The idea is radically simple: halt illness at its very core, the genetic code
that tells the body how to function. Turning that idea into reality has become
the life's work of two doctors at the girl's bedside, Michael Blaese and Kenneth
Culver.

   Success in this, one of the world's first gene therapy experiments, would
help usher in a new medicine with the potential to cure some of the world's
worst scourges: cancer, AIDS, cystic fibrosis, muscular dystrophy and
hemophilia.

   As a beginning, the National Institutes of Health doctors are trying to cure
a little-known hereditary disorder called adenosine deaminase (ADA) deficiency,
which has threatened the girl's life since she was born. It is the same disorder
that afflicted David, the famous "bubble boy" forced to live in a sterile world
until he died in 1984 at the age of 12.

   The 6-year-old girl - and an 11- year-old who will be treated soon after -
have no ADA gene and therefore barely functioning immune systems. Until her
first gene therapy treatments in 1990, the younger girl rarely left her house
except to go to the doctor. Her parents even kept her sister home from school,
for fear that she would carry germs into the house.

   Success also would bring personal triumph for Blaese and Culver, the
culmination of a decade-long quest to cure just one rare disease.

   Blaese is chief of NIH's immunology branch. His office is not much bigger
than a large walk-in closet. And his laboratory is a hodgepodge of computers,
microscopes, glassware and notebooks. Refrigerators line the hallways, and there
is barely enough space to turn around.

   He has been trying to develop a gene therapy treatment since the mid-1980s,
when he worked with French Anderson, a pioneer in the field who has since left
NIH. They wanted to make real what had been imagined since the first advances in
the biotechnology revolution.

   Essentially, they wanted to insert genes into a human to treat an illness on
the most basic molecular level. Initial attempts would focus on a patient with a
hereditary, genetic defect. The broader goal: to manipulate a person's genes to
treat all kinds of diseases.

   They chose to work with ADA-deficient children, although only 10 babies are
born each year in North America with the genetic disorder. The illness seemed a
reasonable first choice because it would require inserting only one gene into
the body.

   Without the ADA gene, white blood cells self-destruct, leaving the body
without its usual protection against foreign intruders. The concept was to draw
blood from a child, pick out certain cells and grow them in the laboratory. As
the cells divided, the researchers would insert the ADA gene - a gene that is
easily cloned in the laboratory.

   Then the researchers would hook the child up to an intravenous tube and
inject millions of those cells into the child's blood. If all worked well, the
new cells with the ADA gene would begin producing an enzyme crucial to the
immune system.

   Originally, Anderson and French wanted to put the genes into the bone
marrow's stem cells, which, like an assembly line, can stamp out replicas of
different kinds of blood cells. Correcting those stem cells would, they thought,
eliminate the problem for the rest of someone's life.

   After years of lab experiments - in test tubes and mice - the researchers
were able to get the gene into a stem cell. But when they tried it on larger
animals, they failed.

   Then one day, as Blaese was writing a chapter for a medical textbook, the
answer came to him. "Suddenly, I recognized an observation that I had known, but
hadn't remembered." Reviewing studies of ADA deficiency, he read that children
who improved after being treated with a painful and difficult bone marrow
transplant (one of the few traditional treatments available to children and one
given to David) had the ADA gene in a type of white blood cell.

   About that time, a young researcher showed up to work in his lab. It was
Culver, who several years before had treated an ADA-deficient California girl.
The 2-year-old had been given bone marrow donated by her parents in the hope
that their cells would provide some immunity. But her body did not respond.

   Culver turned the immense frustration over that episode into fuel for his
work. The first assignment for the loquacious, energetic pediatrician was to try
to put the ADA into white blood cells.

   The experiment worked in laboratory animals. "We never thought it wasn't
going to work. I think every obstacle strengthened our resolve," Culver recalls.

   Today, the two girls, both from Ohio, must be treated every few months with
infusions of white blood cells containing the ADA gene to replace cells that
have died out. But for the first time in their lives, their bodies are sending
out the normal signals of an immune system. They have grown tonsils;
vaccinations for childhood diseases have taken.

   Now the doctors are pressing for a permanent cure. Within weeks, the girls
will lie down on a hospital bed at NIH for an infusion of genetically engineered
stem cells. If it works, altered stem cells will find their way to the bone
marrow, where they will remain for a lifetime reproducing white blood cells with
the ADA gene.

   But the final test may not come until the girls are taken off the traditional
therapy, a medicine they take once or twice a week at a cost of $100,000 to
$200,000 annually.

   A permanent cure for the girls would open the door for further use of gene
therapy. More than a dozen experiments conducted by other researchers have
already begun.

   BALTIMORE SUN

GRAPHIC: FILE PHOTOS / AP: David, the "bubble boy"; David, 12, being prepared
for operation months before he died

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 1999


                              171 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1993 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                    February 28, 1993, Sunday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. B6

LENGTH: 1005 words

HEADLINE: A new era of mdeicine dawns Infusion of genetically altered cells may
cure 6-year-old's fatal illness

BYLINE: BY LIZ BOWIE SPECIAL TO THE STARMEDICINE GENETICS RESEARCH

BODY:


    Within weeks, two Maryland doctors will provide a peek at 21st-century
medicine. A girl whose short life has been consumed by the struggle against a
fatal illness will get an infusion of genetically altered cells - in a treatment
so painless that she'll probably be watching one of her favorite videos, maybe
The Little Mermaid, during the procedure.

   If the treatment works, the girl will be cured in a matter of months.

   The idea is radically simple: halt illness at its very core, the genetic code
that tells the body how to function. Turning that idea into reality has become
the life's work of two doctors at the girl's bedside, Michael Blaese and Kenneth
Culver.

   Success in this, one of the world's first gene therapy experiments, would
help usher in a new medicine with the potential to cure some of the world's
worst scourges: cancer, AIDS, cystic fibrosis, muscular dystrophy and
hemophilia.

   As a beginning, the National Institutes of Health doctors are trying to cure
a little-known hereditary disorder called adenosine deaminase (ADA) deficiency,
which has threatened the girl's life since she was born. It is the same disorder
that afflicted David, the famous "bubble boy" forced to live in a sterile world
until he died in 1984 at the age of 12.

   The 6-year-old girl - and an 11- year-old who will be treated soon after -
have no ADA gene and therefore barely functioning immune systems. Until her
first gene therapy treatments in 1990, the younger girl rarely left her house
except to go to the doctor. Her parents even kept her sister home from school,
for fear that she would carry germs into the house.

   Success also would bring personal triumph for Blaese and Culver, the
culmination of a decade-long quest to cure just one rare disease.

   Blaese is chief of NIH's immunology branch. His office is not much bigger
than a large walk-in closet. And his laboratory is a hodgepodge of computers,
microscopes, glassware and notebooks. Refrigerators line the hallways, and there
is barely enough space to turn around.

   He has been trying to develop a gene therapy treatment since the mid-1980s,
when he worked with French Anderson, a pioneer in the field who has since left
NIH. They wanted to make real what had been imagined since the first advances in
the biotechnology revolution.

   Essentially, they wanted to insert genes into a human to treat an illness on
the most basic molecular level. Initial attempts would focus on a patient with a
hereditary, genetic defect. The broader goal: to manipulate a person's genes to
treat all kinds of diseases.

   They chose to work with ADA-deficient children, although only 10 babies are
born each year in North America with the genetic disorder. The illness seemed a
reasonable first choice because it would require inserting only one gene into
the body.

   Without the ADA gene, white blood cells self-destruct, leaving the body
without its usual protection against foreign intruders. The concept was to draw
blood from a child, pick out certain cells and grow them in the laboratory. As
the cells divided, the researchers would insert the ADA gene - a gene that is
easily cloned in the laboratory.

   Then the researchers would hook the child up to an intravenous tube and
inject millions of those cells into the child's blood. If all worked well, the
new cells with the ADA gene would begin producing an enzyme crucial to the
immune system.

   Originally, Anderson and French wanted to put the genes into the bone
marrow's stem cells, which, like an assembly line, can stamp out replicas of
different kinds of blood cells. Correcting those stem cells would, they thought,
eliminate the problem for the rest of someone's life.

   After years of lab experiments - in test tubes and mice - the researchers
were able to get the gene into a stem cell. But when they tried it on larger
animals, they failed.

   Then one day, as Blaese was writing a chapter for a medical textbook, the
answer came to him. "Suddenly, I recognized an observation that I had known, but
hadn't remembered." Reviewing studies of ADA deficiency, he read that children
who improved after being treated with a painful and difficult bone marrow
transplant (one of the few traditional treatments available to children and one
given to David) had the ADA gene in a type of white blood cell.

   About that time, a young researcher showed up to work in his lab. It was
Culver, who several years before had treated an ADA-deficient California girl.
The 2-year-old had been given bone marrow donated by her parents in the hope
that their cells would provide some immunity. But her body did not respond.

   Culver turned the immense frustration over that episode into fuel for his
work. The first assignment for the loquacious, energetic pediatrician was to try
to put the ADA into white blood cells.

   The experiment worked in laboratory animals. "We never thought it wasn't
going to work. I think every obstacle strengthened our resolve," Culver recalls.

   Today, the two girls, both from Ohio, must be treated every few months with
infusions of white blood cells containing the ADA gene to replace cells that
have died out. But for the first time in their lives, their bodies are sending
out the normal signals of an immune system. They have grown tonsils;
vaccinations for childhood diseases have taken.

   Now the doctors are pressing for a permanent cure. Within weeks, the girls
will lie down on a hospital bed at NIH for an infusion of genetically engineered
stem cells. If it works, altered stem cells will find their way to the bone
marrow, where they will remain for a lifetime reproducing white blood cells with
the ADA gene.

   But the final test may not come until the girls are taken off the traditional
therapy, a medicine they take once or twice a week at a cost of $ 100,000 to $
200,000 annually.

   A permanent cure for the girls would open the door for further use of gene
therapy. More than a dozen experiments conducted by other researchers have
already begun.

   BALTIMORE SUN


GRAPHIC: FILE PHOTOS / AP: David, the "bubble boy"

   David, 12, being prepared for operation months before he died

LOAD-DATE: March 1, 1993


                              172 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1993 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                         February 9, 1993, Tuesday, AM

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A11

LENGTH: 374 words

HEADLINE: Bourassa sounds 'good' on first day of treatment

BYLINE: By Robert McKenzie TORONTO STAR

DATELINE: QUEBEC CITY

BODY:

   QUEBEC CITY - Premier Robert Bourassa is responding well to the experimental
therapy he began receiving at a U.S. cancer institute yesterday, says his
office.

   Bourassa spoke on the phone to his press officer, Sylvie Godin, only three
hours after the interleukin-2 treatment began and "his voice was good," she told
reporters.

   "It's obviously no picnic but this is encouraging," Godin added at the first
of a series of daily news briefings to be held throughout the week-long
treatment.

   Godin said Bourassa had the daily Quebec press clippings faxed to him at the
National Cancer Institute in Bethesda, Md., and was also reading government
documents he took along with him.

   Bourassa has received a massive injection of tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes
(TILs), cancer-fighting cells removed from a tumor in his chest last Jan. 6 and
multiplied a thousandfold in a laboratory culture.

   The injection is followed up with daily doses of interleukin-2, a naturally
occurring substance in the body which also boosts the immune system.

   The treatment, developed by Dr. Steven Rosenberg, who is personally handling
Bourassa's case, involves severe - but temporary - side effects.

   It is claimed that in cases of advanced melanoma such as the premier's,
tumors throughout the body disappear completely in 10 per cent of those treated
while they are reduced by more than half in 40 per cent of patients.

   Godin said Bourassa is not receiving a controversial gene therapy developed
by Rosenberg, which was the subject of a critical article in a recent issue of
the science journal Nature.

   The magazine said that the National Institutes of Health, the parent body of
the U.S. National Cancer Institute, pulled a $3.9-million grant for Rosenberg's
Tumor Necrosis Factor (TNF) gene procedure because it "appeared to blur the line
between fundamental research and human clinical experimentation."

   Bourassa is expected to be released from hospital by the weekend and rest for
10 days before undergoing a second set of treatments.

   The effectiveness of the treatment can be measured about two months after
that, his doctors have said.

   Hundreds of Quebecers have inundated Bourassa's office with get-well
messages, Godin said.

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 1999


                              173 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1993 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                    February 9, 1993, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A11

LENGTH: 370 words

HEADLINE: Bourassa sounds 'good' on first day of treatment

BYLINE: BY ROBERT MCKENZIE TORONTO STAR

DATELINE: QUEBEC CITYROBERT BOURASSA CANCER

BODY:

   Premier Robert Bourassa is responding well to the experimental therapy he
began receiving at a U.S. cancer institute yesterday, says his office.

   Bourassa spoke on the phone to his press officer, Sylvie Godin, only three
hours after the interleukin-2 treatment began and "his voice was good," she told
reporters.

   "It's obviously no picnic but this is encouraging," Godin added at the first
of a series of daily news briefings to be held throughout the week-long
treatment.

   Godin said Bourassa had the daily Quebec press clippings faxed to him at the
National Cancer Institute in Bethesda, Md., and was also reading government
documents he took along with him.

   Bourassa has received a massive injection of tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes
(TILs), cancer-fighting cells removed from a tumor in his chest last Jan. 6 and
multiplied a thousandfold in a laboratory culture.

   The injection is followed up with daily doses of interleukin-2, a naturally
occurring substance in the body which also boosts the immune system.

   The treatment, developed by Dr. Steven Rosenberg, who is personally handling
Bourassa's case, involves severe - but temporary - side effects.

   It is claimed that in cases of advanced melanoma such as the premier's,
tumors throughout the body disappear completely in 10 per cent of those treated
while they are reduced by more than half in 40 per cent of patients.

   Godin said Bourassa is not receiving a controversial gene therapy developed
by Rosenberg, which was the subject of a critical article in a recent issue of
the science journal Nature.

   The magazine said that the National Institutes of Health, the parent body of
the U.S. National Cancer Institute, pulled a $ 3.9-million grant for Rosenberg's
Tumor Necrosis Factor (TNF) gene procedure because it "appeared to blur the line
between fundamental research and human clinical experimentation."

   Bourassa is expected to be released from hospital by the weekend and rest for
10 days before undergoing a second set of treatments.

   The effectiveness of the treatment can be measured about two months after
that, his doctors have said.

   Hundreds of Quebecers have inundated Bourassa's office with get-well
messages, Godin said.


LOAD-DATE: February 10, 1993


                              174 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1993 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                         February 4, 1993, Thursday, AM

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A12

LENGTH: 227 words

HEADLINE: Bourassa to undergo therapy for cancer

BYLINE: By Robert McKenzie TORONTO STAR

DATELINE: QUEBEC CITY

BODY:

   QUEBEC CITY - Premier Robert Bourassa is determined to win his latest bout
with cancer and has no immediate plans to leave office, his staff says.

   Bourassa will enter the National Cancer Institute at Bethesda, Md., within
the next few days to undergo experimental gene therapy, it was announced
yesterday.

   A report yesterday in the Montreal newspaper La Presse that Bourassa has
decided to quit politics was emphatically denied by his office.

   Before the denial hit the news wires, Bourassa's staff said they were
inundated by queries from institutions dealing in Quebec government bonds and
other Quebec-related investments.

   Banks in Toronto, Chicago and New York phoned Bourassa's office early
yesterday for first-hand information.

   Bourassa learned on Tuesday that doctors have succeeded in preparing the
vaccine required to treat him.

   Developed by the institute's Dr. Steven Rosenberg, the treatment, referred to
in medical circles as Interleukin-2, involves the multiplication in a laboratory
of healthy cells removed from the patient's body.

   In 30 per cent of cases, the vaccine cannot be produced and the verdict, in
Bourassa's case, had not been expected before mid-February. But Tuesday Bourassa
learned "the cells are evolving in a very favorable manner" and that treatment
could begin as early as the start of next week.

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 1999


                              175 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1993 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                   February 4, 1993, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A12

LENGTH: 223 words

HEADLINE: Bourassa to undergo therapy for cancer

BYLINE: BY ROBERT MCKENZIE TORONTO STAR

DATELINE: QUEBEC CITYROBERT BOURASSA CANCER

BODY:

   Premier Robert Bourassa is determined to win his latest bout with cancer and
has no immediate plans to leave office, his staff says.

   Bourassa will enter the National Cancer Institute at Bethesda, Md., within
the next few days to undergo experimental gene therapy, it was announced
yesterday.

   A report yesterday in the Montreal newspaper La Presse that Bourassa has
decided to quit politics was emphatically denied by his office.

   Before the denial hit the news wires, Bourassa's staff said they were
inundated by queries from institutions dealing in Quebec government bonds and
other Quebec-related investments.

   Banks in Toronto, Chicago and New York phoned Bourassa's office early
yesterday for first-hand information.

   Bourassa learned on Tuesday that doctors have succeeded in preparing the
vaccine required to treat him.

   Developed by the institute's Dr. Steven Rosenberg, the treatment, referred to
in medical circles as Interleukin-2, involves the multiplication in a laboratory
of healthy cells removed from the patient's body.

   In 30 per cent of cases, the vaccine cannot be produced and the verdict, in
Bourassa's case, had not been expected before mid-February. But Tuesday Bourassa
learned "the cells are evolving in a very favorable manner" and that treatment
could begin as early as the start of next week.


LOAD-DATE: February 5, 1993


                              176 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1993 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                   February 3, 1993, Wednesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A3

LENGTH: 379 words

HEADLINE: Bourassa set to start treatment for cancer

BYLINE: By Robert McKenzie Toronto Star

DATELINE: QUEBEC CITY

BODY:

   QUEBEC CITY - Premier Robert Bourassa will enter an American research
hospital within the next few days to undergo cancer treatment, it was announced
today.

   Bourassa's office said the laboratory culture that makes the treatment
possible has succeeded and the premier has taken the decision to go ahead with
it.

   There is no question of Bourassa resigning from office or reaching any
decision on his future before the treatment at the National Cancer Institute in
Bethesda, Md., several members of his staff said emphatically today.

   They were reacting to a report in the Montreal newspaper La Presse today
quoting unnamed sources as saying Bourassa has made up his mind to quit politics
and order a Liberal leadership campaign to replace him.

   "On the contrary, he's in a fighting mood," said press aide Sylvie Godin.

   Godin said Bourassa is buoyed by news from Dr. Steven Rosenberg, who has
developed experimental cancer gene therapy based on Interleukin-2, that the
preparatory laboratory work required to treat him has succeeded.

   There was a 30 per cent chance that the laboratory work - in which healthy
cells taken from a tumor in Bourassa's chest on Jan 6 are multiplied for
reinjection in his body - would fail, said Godin.

   "Mr. Bourassa has had excellent news," she said. "The cells are developing
very favorably, more rapidly than expected."

   The premier originally expected to return to Bethesda after a Feb. 11-12
Quebec Liberal caucus in Montreal but is waiting for a call to leave before then
- perhaps as early as this weekend, Godin said.

   She said the La Presse report doubtless stems from people close to Bourassa
who have been advising him to resign and concentrate on fighting the melanoma
which recurred in December after a 2 1/2-year remission.

   But she said many other friends have been urging Bourassa to stay on and
that's his present inclination.

   "If there had been a worsening of his condition, it might be different, but
he has had good news," she said. "He's in a fighting mood, determined to beat
the illness."

   Bourassa's office said the report he could be quitting caused nervousness in
financial circles. Banks in New York, Chicago and Toronto phoned the premier's
office directly to check out the report.

GRAPHIC: Photo: Robert Bourassa

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 1999


                              177 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1993 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                   February 3, 1993, Wednesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A3

LENGTH: 375 words

HEADLINE: Bourassa set to start treatment for cancer

BYLINE: BY ROBERT MCKENZIE TORONTO STAR

DATELINE: QUEBEC CITYROBERT BOURASSA

BODY:

   Premier Robert Bourassa will enter an American research hospital within the
next few days to undergo cancer treatment, it was announced today.

   Bourassa's office said the laboratory culture that makes the treatment
possible has succeeded and the premier has taken the decision to go ahead with
it.

   There is no question of Bourassa resigning from office or reaching any
decision on his future before the treatment at the National Cancer Institute in
Bethesda, Md., several members of his staff said emphatically today.

   They were reacting to a report in the Montreal newspaper La Presse today
quoting unnamed sources as saying Bourassa has made up his mind to quit politics
and order a Liberal leadership campaign to replace him.

   "On the contrary, he's in a fighting mood," said press aide Sylvie Godin.

   Godin said Bourassa is buoyed by news from Dr. Steven Rosenberg, who has
developed experimental cancer gene therapy based on Interleukin-2, that the
preparatory laboratory work required to treat him has succeeded.

   There was a 30 per cent chance that the laboratory work - in which healthy
cells taken from a tumor in Bourassa's chest on Jan 6 are multiplied for
reinjection in his body - would fail, said Godin.

   "Mr. Bourassa has had excellent news," she said. "The cells are developing
very favorably, more rapidly than expected."

   The premier originally expected to return to Bethesda after a Feb. 11-12
Quebec Liberal caucus in Montreal but is waiting for a call to leave before then
- perhaps as early as this weekend, Godin said.

   She said the La Presse report doubtless stems from people close to Bourassa
who have been advising him to resign and concentrate on fighting the melanoma
which recurred in December after a 2 1/2-year remission.

   But she said many other friends have been urging Bourassa to stay on and
that's his present inclination.

   "If there had been a worsening of his condition, it might be different, but
he has had good news," she said. "He's in a fighting mood, determined to beat
the illness."

   Bourassa's office said the report he could be quitting caused nervousness in
financial circles. Banks in New York, Chicago and Toronto phoned the premier's
office directly to check out the report.


GRAPHIC: Photo: Robert Bourassa

LOAD-DATE: February 4, 1993


                              178 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1993 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

              January 16, 1993, Saturday, SATURDAY SECOND EDITION

SECTION: INSIGHT; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 999 words

HEADLINE: Mulroney's future rides on Bourassa's health

BYLINE: By Bob McKenzie Toronto Star

DATELINE: QUEBEC CITY

BODY:

   QUEBEC CITY - In a twist of fate that neither man could have imagined a few
weeks ago, Robert Bourassa's new battle with cancer has become a major element
in Brian Mulroney's decision whether or not to remain in politics.

   Some Quebecers who know Mulroney well believe the decision with which the
Prime Minister has been wrestling at a Florida retreat is now inextricably
entwined with the conclusions Bourassa will draw on his own future following new
medical examinations in mid-February.

   Of all the questions raised by Bourassa's condition - and there are many,
including the lack of an obvious replacement as Quebec Liberal leader and the
diminished chances of stopping the Quebec separatist movement - the most
pressing concern Mulroney's future and the impending federal election.

   "I'm utterly convinced that Mulroney will put everything on hold until he
knows what Bourassa is going to do," confided one Conservative strategist.

   While underlining that Mulroney has kept his next move strictly to himself,
the strategist added: "Bourassa's departure would create a void in the
federalist camp in Quebec. If Brian were to quit at the same time, it would be a
total vacuum from a federalist point of view.

   "Brian Mulroney weighs every aspect of a question before taking a decision
and I just can't imagine him resigning with such an important matter as
Bourassa's future still up in the air."

   Few political insiders in Quebec these days want their name linked with
speculation on Bourassa's illness - or the possibility of his resignation - and
the Conservative strategist, like several others, discussed the situation on the
understanding they wouldn't be identified.

   He said English Canada doesn't yet seem to have realized the potential
implications of the Bourassa illness for national unity. "(Hockey star) Mario
Lemieux's illness was treated as a bigger story," he said. "But take Bourassa
out of the equation in Quebec and there's nobody left on the provincial scene to
pull the nationalists and federalists together."

   Bourassa will hear in mid-February whether experimental gene therapy - based
on a cancer-killing vaccine developed from healthy cells extracted along with a
tumor in his chest on Jan. 6 - is possible.

   Should Bourassa opt for the treatment, specialists say he could be forced to
spend two or three weeks recuperating from the severe side effects, but would be
able to return to work after that.

   The strategist said he's sure a healthy Bourassa would throw the provincial
Liberal machine behind the Mulroney-led Conservatives. Bourassa has no love for
Liberal Leader Jean Chretien, who trails practically every popularity poll in
Quebec in any case. He also has an interest in puncturing the separatist Bloc
Quebecois, which has the full political and logistical backing of the Parti
Quebecois in the coming election.

   But the strategist evoked a gloomy scenario for the Conservatives - one he
says Mulroney must certainly have mulled over - in which federal Liberal figures
like Senator Pietro Rizzutto become kingmakers in a provincial Liberal
leadership campaign.

   The Conservatives, who won the 1984 and 1988 elections in Quebec with a
coalition of moderate PQ nationalists and provincial Liberal federalists, have
already lost the nationalists to the Bloc. Depending on who replaced Bourassa,
they could lose the federalists to Chretien's Liberals.

   Even then, it remains doubtful whether that could prevent the Bloc from
sweeping all but the few Quebec ridings with a sizeable English-speaking
population.

   Quebec-based polling firms consistently show the Bloc with a commanding lead
in French-speaking ridings. A Leger & Leger poll published in Le Journal de
Quebec on Jan. 4 showed Bloc Leader Lucien Bouchard rated as Quebec's most
popular political leader with 20.7 per cent support.

   Chretien, on the other hand, was favorite with 1.6 per cent of those polled.

   ONE OF Quebec's leading young political scientists, Professor Guy Laforest of
Laval University, also believes Bourassa's future has become a key element in
Mulroney's calculations.

   "Mulroney is very tempted to stay on, no matter what," said Laforest. "Right
now, he's looking for a reason to justify staying. This could be it.

   "He can argue that there should not be this uncertainty in Ottawa and in
Quebec at the same time. It could result in Mulroney delaying his decision or
announcing that he's staying on."

   Leon Dion, the dean of Quebec political scientists, says the courage and
dignity displayed by Bourassa in his two appearances this week may well provoke
a groundswell of support for him to remain in office for some time no matter
what his health.

   "A week ago, I think there might have been people saying he should resign as
quickly as possible but he won a great deal of respect with the way he handled
himself at the airport and at the news conference in Quebec city," said Dion.

   Dion said he has talked with a number of provincial Liberals and detects no
undercurrent of intrigue about the leadership.

   "In the hypothesis that Mr. Bourassa did resign, there is no one who emerges
from the pack at the moment. The Liberal party is sorely divided (between its
federalist and nationalist wings) and the next leader must be someone capable of
pulling all those elements together. Perhaps they would be obliged to look
outside the ranks of the cabinet and the elected members."

   Dion believes that the Liberals - if they are indeed forced to hold a
leadership convention - must hold off until after the federal elections.

   "A new leader would have to be chosen in the light of the situation at that
time - for example if the Bloc Quebecois wins 45, 50 or 55 seats. Or suppose
there's no majority government in Ottawa. Or suppose it's a majority government
but it's led by Jean Chretien. All these things would have a tremendous
influence on the choice of the person who would lead the Quebec Liberals into
the next election."

GRAPHIC: Photo: Robert Bourassa

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 1999


                              179 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1993 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                January 10, 1993, Sunday, SUNDAY SECOND EDITION

SECTION: INSIGHT; Pg. B7

LENGTH: 923 words

HEADLINE: New rules for a new science

BYLINE: By Tom Harpur

BODY:

   A salesman was talking with a farmer near his barn. Every now and then his
eye caught a blur as some creature or other whizzed past them. "What on Earth is
that?" he asked. The farmer said: "Well it's wonderful what they can do now.
That's a three-legged chicken designed by scientists in Ottawa. It's meant for
those times when two drumsticks aren't enough." Quite impressed, the salesman
asked: "How do they taste?" The farmer replied: "Nobody knows. We haven't been
able to catch one yet."

   The amazing wonderworld of genetic manipulation has begun to engulf us with
hitherto undreamed-of new knowledge and revolutionary possibilities. But, as
with the apocryphal three-legged chicken, there is bad news as well as good
news. The question of how this knowledge and the almost inconceivable power it
carries with it is to be used presents us with an unprecendented host of
critical moral decisions.

   The possibilities for gross abuses and for grave, irreversible errors -
including the destruction of human nature and of the natural world as we have
known it - are real and quite terrifying. On the other hand, new genetic
research conducted by the Human Genome Project, launched in the U.S. in 1988
with a $1 billion budget, holds out the hope of gains beyond anyone but a
science fiction writer's wildest predictions. Gene therapy, first carried out on
Sept. 14, 1990 on a four-year old American girl suffering from a deadly genetic
disorder, extends the promise of effective treatments for perhaps the majority
of the 3,000 known mongenic (single gene) defects, such as cystic fibrosis and
sickle-cell anemia, which still plague humanity. And much more as well.

   For those with an ultra-conservative religious outlook, any meddling with DNA
(deoxyibronucleic acid), the coded information that is the very stuff of life
itself, is a usurping of the role of the Creator and therefore wrong. But, since
sacred scriptures say nothing directly dealing with such an issue and since, on
the other hand, there is much in them about using one's mind, seeking knowledge,
and being partners or co-creators with God, most believers would agree with
enlightened humanists that informed conscience must be our guide.

   Besides, there is the totally pragmatic consideration that, as in the case of
splitting the atom, this particular Pandora's Box has already been opened.
Wringing our hands and moaning "we mustn't play God" is a futile waste of time.
God has made us in such a way that we had to pursue the knowledge. It's a case
not of whether now but of how.

   What we urgently need is a meticulous elaboration of the salient values which
constitute a truly human kind of life and environment. Then we can use these to
formulate specific criteria by which any proposed genetic manipulation can be
judged to be ethical or not. For example, the generally accepted value of the
sacredness of human life assumes several other key values as well - the
importance of the uniqueness of every individual, the right not to be treated as
an object or thing, the significance of our differences from other animals (as
well as our similarities), our right to live in and enjoy the world of nature,
our right to personal freedom and to justice.

   Once we begin to do this - and perhaps some kind of global or universal
statement of what it means to be human, specifically aimed at the new choices
opened by our explorations into DNA will be necessary - it becomes easier to
agree on the protocols or guidelines for the new science.

   * Thus, cloning or the production of identical human beings will be strictly
prohibited because it threatens several of the values already listed,
particularly that of individual uniqueness.

   * All attempts at human-animal hybridization, even though the motives be of
the highest calibre (for example, to enhance our night vision or our physical
stamina) must forever be taboo. In addition to ignoring the values cited, it
wrongly treats animals as though they have no rights and risks total distortion
of the animal kingdom.

   * Any experimenation aimed at "racial hygiene" or eugenics - the creation of
a superior, master race - will be always and everywhere illegal. Apart from the
sinister lessons of Hitler's Germany, this approach is immoral because it denies
the uniqueness and the essential humanity of all who fail to measure up. It
introduces a false value, that of perfection and raises the question: who
becomes the judge?

   * Any plans to design "humans" for special callings, as robot-like warriors,
for example, or as automatons for industry, mining, space travel or security
forces would be self-evidently immoral (ie. contrary to our criteria) and
therefore banned.

   * The same criteria would lead us to prevent any scheme aimed at changing our
nature genetically to make us pollution-resistant. For example, changing our
respiratory system or our digestive system so that we would breath the foulest
air and eat toxic foods would begin a process of changing our essential humanity
that is utterly unacceptable. It would mean the covering up of one injustice,
the degradation of the Earth's biosystems, by a second injustice, an ersatz
humanity.

   The point is that contrary to the naysayers and the alarmists we can reap the
benefits of genetic engineering and avoid the many risks if we're prepared to
work at it . Proper guidelines are possible. The fact that knowledge can be
sadly abused in no way prohibits its lawful use.

   * Tom Harpur is a Toronto author and broadcaster.

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 1999


                              180 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1993 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                January 10, 1993, Sunday, SUNDAY SECOND EDITION

SECTION: INSIGHT; Pg. B6

LENGTH: 1484 words

HEADLINE: Medical advances multiply

BYLINE: By Marilyn Dunlop Toronto Star

BODY:

   Doctors are on the doorstep of a new type of medicine - one that holds out
new promise and new problems.

   It's based on deciphering the genetic code, which is being linked to more and
more diseases: Of every 1,000 babies born in Canada this year, about 75 will
have some defect or disease caused by faulty genes.

   More and more, those faulty genes can be detected - in the parents before
conception, in the fetus before birth or even later in life. But once the
defects are found, patients, parents and doctors face tough choices, because
often there is no treatment.

   Consider the condition called Fragile X syndrome - it's the second most
common cause of mental retardation in boys after Down syndrome.

   "Eighteen months ago we could not have known exactly what had caused a boy's
retardation," says Phil Wyatt, director of the genetics program at North York
General Hosital.

   But in 1991, the genetic cause of Fragile X was discovered.

   "Suddenly we could determine why a child was so slow in development," Wyatt
says. A drop of blood is used to screen infants - a process so simple that some
doctors would like to see every newborn screened.

   So far, there is nothing doctors can do to treat Fragile X patients. But they
can alert women who carry the defective gene and give them the option of ending
a pregnancy if a male fetus has the gene.

   (One in 1,000 women carries the Fragile X gene, which is located on the
sex-determining X chromosome. Women have two copies of the X chromosome, so they
always have a healthy version of the gene and don't get Fragile X. But males
inherit an X chromosome from their mother and a Y chromosome from their father -
and if their X is the mother's defective version, they'll get Fragile X.)

   There are an estimated 100,000 human genes - and researchers think if they
knew more about them, they'd have an enormous tool in the battle against
disease.

   Genetics is rapidly becoming a crucial part of medicine - and North York
General is a good example: When the genetics unit began work in 1983, it was
expected it would see about 400 patients a year.

   It is now has 8,000 patients a year. The four geneticists and eight
counsellors also regularly conduct a program for people in Timmins, North Bay
and Sudbury.

   "It is the threshold of a new style of medicine," Wyatt says. "Doctors used
to just examine a patient to make a diagnosis. Now we are examining the
patient's immediate family and extended family."

   Wyatt unfolds a two-metre wide chart, a genetic family tree of one little boy
with Fragile X syndrome. "We start out with one patient, the boy, and wind up
with many family members. We know the mother is a carrier.

   "We know where the great-grandmother is buried. If we had a tissue sample
from her body we could know which other members of the family are at risk of
having children with Fragile X.

   "But do we have any right to obtain it? It is a huge ethical problem. Where
to stop?"

   Or consider Tracey Plourde.

   She knew she had a chance of inheriting Huntington's disease - an
always-fatal disease that causes some brain cells to degenerate, gradually
destroying the mind and memory.

   Huntington's is one of about 5,000 known genetic diseases, most of which show
up in childhood. But Huntington's symptoms don't begin to show until adulthood,
usually when an affected person is between 30 and 50.

   Plourde's mother has the cruel genetic disease. So did her mother's father.
And that meant Plourde had a 50-50 chance of having inherited the gene defect
from her mother.

   But, until she was in her mid-20s, Plourde didn't want to know.

   "Before I was married I figured life is life and you handle it as it comes,"
Plourde says.

   "When I had my son, who is now 3, things changed," she says. "It hit me that
I needed to know whether I carried the gene so we could plan for his future."

   She was 27 years old and fearful that, like her mother, symptoms could begin
in her 30s.

   Her worry led her to North York General, where the genetics department is one
of 14 centres in Canada that perform predictive testing for Huntington's
disease. It provides the laboratory testing for all of Ontario.

   The gene for Huntington's has not yet been found, even though scientists have
known for almost 10 years which chromosome it's on.

   But researchers have found markers - pieces of DNA that are almost always
inherited along with the gene - that make predictive testing 95 to 99 per cent
accurate, according to geneticist Dr. Wendy Meschino.

   It took nearly a year of testing - using a process called linkage analysis -
before Meschino was able to tell Plourde it was almost certain she had not
inherited the gene.

   In linkage analysis, researchers study the genes, not only of the patient,
but of close relatives. In Plourde's case, scientists analyzed blood samples
obtained from her mother and her maternal grandmother.

   Her grandfather had died of the disease but by comparing Plourde's
grandmother and mother, director Janet Buchanan and her staff at the hospital's
molecular genetics laboratory could determine which chromosome segments
Plourde's mother had inherited from each parent.

   When she got the good news last July, Plourde says, she didn't know whether
to laugh or cry. "My husband was so happy. My doctors were so happy. But I just
couldn't relax. It took quite a while, but as each day went by it got better."

   She had subconsciously steeled herself for bad news. "If my risk had been
high, I don't know how I would have coped. I wouldn't have fallen apart but I
would have changed, I think."

   She knows she would have felt guilty about marrying and becoming pregnant
when she might not be able to raise the child and fearful she had passed on to
him the tragic family legacy.

   Plourde said she is not bothered by the tiny bit of uncertainty that exists
because the gene has not been pinpointed - a 3 per cent risk that she has the
gene but not the markers that usually go with it. "To me that's zero." she says.

   Meschino says some of the people - now in their 40s and 50s - who have been
tested and found to be at miminal risk have deep regrets they didn't know years
earlier.

   "They were afraid they would develop Huntington's and so they did not marry
or have children or start a new business and now it is too late," she says.

   But some people who fear they are at risk cannot be given an answer. There
are not enough relatives available for comparisons. Mapping the human genome -
the complete set of genes - may pry out the baffling gene and provide an answer
for them.

   Canadian researchers have a great track record in identifying genes that
cause severe diseases. The gene for cystic fibrosis, the most common genetic
disease among caucasians, was discovered by Lap-Chee Tsui and colleagues at the
Hospital for Sick Children.

   The gene for one kind of muscular dystrophy (myotonic dystrophy) was found at
the Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario by Robert Korneluk and colleagues.

   Ronald Worton and colleagues at the Hospital for Sick Children played a major
part in identifying the gene for Duchenne muscular dystrophy.

   Gene therapy is already being attempted for some conditions. A 27-year-old
Canadian woman, for example, who is at high risk of heart attack because she has
inherited two defective copies of a gene, is the first in the world to be
treated genetically for that condition.

   The Montreal woman was treated by a team at the University of Michigan in Ann
Arbor. The doctors removed a segment of her liver, altered the cells to give
them a healthy copy of the gene and put them back into a vein. She was treated
last June and is well but the doctors have not yet reported on whether the
healthy genes continue to work normally.

   Two research groups in the United States plan to begin gene therapy in a
small number of patients with cystic fibrosis. The treatment involves spraying
into their lungs harmless common cold viruses carrying healthy copies of the
cystic fibrosis gene. It won't cure the disease but if it works, it may correct
the flaw that causes the airways in their lungs to clog with thick mucous.

   Five medical centres are trying to correct the defect in boys with Duchenne
muscular dystrophy by inserting into muscles in their legs or arms muscle cells
obtained from fathers or brothers. The implanted cells have healthy copies of
the dystrophy gene and might be able to make the muscles of the boys stronger,
although not cure the disease. So far the research teams have not reported much
success, but they may yet.

   While genetic therapy that can cure a disease is almost certainly years away,
patients already benefit when a gene has been identified. Phil Wyatt says boys
with muscular dystrophy used to have to undergo painful muscle biopsies so the
diagnosis could be made. Now, says Wyatt, a small blood sample is all that is
required.

GRAPHIC: Star photo (Mahler): Tracey Plourde with Wendy Meschino

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 1999


                              181 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1993 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                    January 10, 1993, Sunday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: INSIGHT; Pg. B6

LENGTH: 1474 words

HEADLINE: Medical advances multiply

BYLINE: BY MARILYN DUNLOP TORONTO STARGENETICS RESEARCH BIRTH

BODY:

   one that holds out new promise and new problems.

   It's based on deciphering the genetic code, which is being linked to more and
more diseases: Of every 1,000 babies born in Canada this year, about 75 will
have some defect or disease caused by faulty genes.

   More and more, those faulty genes can be detected - in the parents before
conception, in the fetus before birth or even later in life. But once the
defects are found, patients, parents and doctors face tough choices, because
often there is no treatment.

   Consider the condition called Fragile X syndrome - it's the second most
common cause of mental retardation in boys after Down syndrome.

   "Eighteen months ago we could not have known exactly what had caused a boy's
retardation," says Phil Wyatt, director of the genetics program at North York
General Hosital.

   But in 1991, the genetic cause of Fragile X was discovered.

   "Suddenly we could determine why a child was so slow in development," Wyatt
says. A drop of blood is used to screen infants - a process so simple that some
doctors would like to see every newborn screened.

   So far, there is nothing doctors can do to treat Fragile X patients. But they
can alert women who carry the defective gene and give them the option of ending
a pregnancy if a male fetus has the gene.

   (One in 1,000 women carries the Fragile X gene, which is located on the
sex-determining X chromosome. Women have two copies of the X chromosome, so they
always have a healthy version of the gene and don't get Fragile X. But males
inherit an X chromosome from their mother and a Y chromosome from their father -
and if their X is the mother's defective version, they'll get Fragile X.)

   There are an estimated 100,000 human genes - and researchers think if they
knew more about them, they'd have an enormous tool in the battle against
disease.

   Genetics is rapidly becoming a crucial part of medicine - and North York
General is a good example: When the genetics unit began work in 1983, it was
expected it would see about 400 patients a year.

   It is now has 8,000 patients a year. The four geneticists and eight
counsellors also regularly conduct a program for people in Timmins, North Bay
and Sudbury.

   "It is the threshold of a new style of medicine," Wyatt says. "Doctors used
to just examine a patient to make a diagnosis. Now we are examining the
patient's immediate family and extended family."

   Wyatt unfolds a two-metre wide chart, a genetic family tree of one little boy
with Fragile X syndrome. "We start out with one patient, the boy, and wind up
with many family members. We know the mother is a carrier.

   "We know where the great-grandmother is buried. If we had a tissue sample
from her body we could know which other members of the family are at risk of
having children with Fragile X.

   "But do we have any right to obtain it? It is a huge ethical problem. Where
to stop?"

   Or consider Tracey Plourde.

   She knew she had a chance of inheriting Huntington's disease - an
always-fatal disease that causes some brain cells to degenerate, gradually
destroying the mind and memory.

   Huntington's is one of about 5,000 known genetic diseases, most of which show
up in childhood. But Huntington's symptoms don't begin to show until adulthood,
usually when an affected person is between 30 and 50.

   Plourde's mother has the cruel genetic disease. So did her mother's father.
And that meant Plourde had a 50-50 chance of having inherited the gene defect
from her mother.

   But, until she was in her mid-20s, Plourde didn't want to know.

   "Before I was married I figured life is life and you handle it as it comes,"
Plourde says.

   "When I had my son, who is now 3, things changed," she says. "It hit me that
I needed to know whether I carried the gene so we could plan for his future."

   She was 27 years old and fearful that, like her mother, symptoms could begin
in her 30s.

   Her worry led her to North York General, where the genetics department is one
of 14 centres in Canada that perform predictive testing for Huntington's
disease. It provides the laboratory testing for all of Ontario.

   The gene for Huntington's has not yet been found, even though scientists have
known for almost 10 years which chromosome it's on.

   But researchers have found markers - pieces of DNA that are almost always
inherited along with the gene - that make predictive testing 95 to 99 per cent
accurate, according to geneticist Dr. Wendy Meschino.

   It took nearly a year of testing - using a process called linkage analysis -
before Meschino was able to tell Plourde it was almost certain she had not
inherited the gene.

   In linkage analysis, researchers study the genes, not only of the patient,
but of close relatives. In Plourde's case, scientists analyzed blood samples
obtained from her mother and her maternal grandmother.

   Her grandfather had died of the disease but by comparing Plourde's
grandmother and mother, director Janet Buchanan and her staff at the hospital's
molecular genetics laboratory could determine which chromosome segments
Plourde's mother had inherited from each parent.

   When she got the good news last July, Plourde says, she didn't know whether
to laugh or cry. "My husband was so happy. My doctors were so happy. But I just
couldn't relax. It took quite a while, but as each day went by it got better."

   She had subconsciously steeled herself for bad news. "If my risk had been
high, I don't know how I would have coped. I wouldn't have fallen apart but I
would have changed, I think."

   She knows she would have felt guilty about marrying and becoming pregnant
when she might not be able to raise the child and fearful she had passed on to
him the tragic family legacy.

   Plourde said she is not bothered by the tiny bit of uncertainty that exists
because the gene has not been pinpointed - a 3 per cent risk that she has the
gene but not the markers that usually go with it. "To me that's zero." she says.

   Meschino says some of the people - now in their 40s and 50s - who have been
tested and found to be at miminal risk have deep regrets they didn't know years
earlier.

   "They were afraid they would develop Huntington's and so they did not marry
or have children or start a new business and now it is too late," she says.

   But some people who fear they are at risk cannot be given an answer. There
are not enough relatives available for comparisons. Mapping the human genome -
the complete set of genes - may pry out the baffling gene and provide an answer
for them.

   Canadian researchers have a great track record in identifying genes that
cause severe diseases. The gene for cystic fibrosis, the most common genetic
disease among caucasians, was discovered by Lap-Chee Tsui and colleagues at the
Hospital for Sick Children.

   The gene for one kind of muscular dystrophy (myotonic dystrophy) was found at
the Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario by Robert Korneluk and colleagues.

   Ronald Worton and colleagues at the Hospital for Sick Children played a major
part in identifying the gene for Duchenne muscular dystrophy.

   Gene therapy is already being attempted for some conditions. A 27-year-old
Canadian woman, for example, who is at high risk of heart attack because she has
inherited two defective copies of a gene, is the first in the world to be
treated genetically for that condition.

   The Montreal woman was treated by a team at the University of Michigan in Ann
Arbor. The doctors removed a segment of her liver, altered the cells to give
them a healthy copy of the gene and put them back into a vein. She was treated
last June and is well but the doctors have not yet reported on whether the
healthy genes continue to work normally.

   Two research groups in the United States plan to begin gene therapy in a
small number of patients with cystic fibrosis. The treatment involves spraying
into their lungs harmless common cold viruses carrying healthy copies of the
cystic fibrosis gene. It won't cure the disease but if it works, it may correct
the flaw that causes the airways in their lungs to clog with thick mucous.

   Five medical centres are trying to correct the defect in boys with Duchenne
muscular dystrophy by inserting into muscles in their legs or arms muscle cells
obtained from fathers or brothers. The implanted cells have healthy copies of
the dystrophy gene and might be able to make the muscles of the boys stronger,
although not cure the disease. So far the research teams have not reported much
success, but they may yet.

   While genetic therapy that can cure a disease is almost certainly years away,
patients already benefit when a gene has been identified. Phil Wyatt says boys
with muscular dystrophy used to have to undergo painful muscle biopsies so the
diagnosis could be made. Now, says Wyatt, a small blood sample is all that is
required.


GRAPHIC: Star photo (Mahler): Tracey Plourde with Wendy Meschino

LOAD-DATE: January 11, 1993


                              182 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1993 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                    January 10, 1993, Sunday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: INSIGHT; Pg. B7

LENGTH: 922 words

HEADLINE: New rules for a new science

BYLINE: BY TOM HARPURGENETICS RESEARCH ETHICS

BODY:


    A salesman was talking with a farmer near his barn. Every now and then his
eye caught a blur as some creature or other whizzed past them. "What on Earth is
that?" he asked. The farmer said: "Well it's wonderful what they can do now.
That's a three-legged chicken designed by scientists in Ottawa. It's meant for
those times when two drumsticks aren't enough." Quite impressed, the salesman
asked: "How do they taste?" The farmer replied: "Nobody knows. We haven't been
able to catch one yet."

   The amazing wonderworld of genetic manipulation has begun to engulf us with
hitherto undreamed-of new knowledge and revolutionary possibilities. But, as
with the apocryphal three-legged chicken, there is bad news as well as good
news. The question of how this knowledge and the almost inconceivable power it
carries with it is to be used presents us with an unprecendented host of
critical moral decisions.

   The possibilities for gross abuses and for grave, irreversible errors -
including the destruction of human nature and of the natural world as we have
known it - are real and quite terrifying. On the other hand, new genetic
research conducted by the Human Genome Project, launched in the U.S. in 1988
with a $ 1 billion budget, holds out the hope of gains beyond anyone but a
science fiction writer's wildest predictions. Gene therapy, first carried out on
Sept. 14, 1990 on a four-year old American girl suffering from a deadly genetic
disorder, extends the promise of effective treatments for perhaps the majority
of the 3,000 known mongenic (single gene) defects, such as cystic fibrosis and
sickle-cell anemia, which still plague humanity. And much more as well.

   For those with an ultra-conservative religious outlook, any meddling with DNA
(deoxyibronucleic acid), the coded information that is the very stuff of life
itself, is a usurping of the role of the Creator and therefore wrong. But, since
sacred scriptures say nothing directly dealing with such an issue and since, on
the other hand, there is much in them about using one's mind, seeking knowledge,
and being partners or co-creators with God, most believers would agree with
enlightened humanists that informed conscience must be our guide.

   Besides, there is the totally pragmatic consideration that, as in the case of
splitting the atom, this particular Pandora's Box has already been opened.
Wringing our hands and moaning "we mustn't play God" is a futile waste of time.
God has made us in such a way that we had to pursue the knowledge. It's a case
not of whether now but of how.

   What we urgently need is a meticulous elaboration of the salient values which
constitute a truly human kind of life and environment. Then we can use these to
formulate specific criteria by which any proposed genetic manipulation can be
judged to be ethical or not. For example, the generally accepted value of the
sacredness of human life assumes several other key values as well - the
importance of the uniqueness of every individual, the right not to be treated as
an object or thing, the significance of our differences from other animals (as
well as our similarities), our right to live in and enjoy the world of nature,
our right to personal freedom and to justice.

   Once we begin to do this - and perhaps some kind of global or universal
statement of what it means to be human, specifically aimed at the new choices
opened by our explorations into DNA will be necessary - it becomes easier to
agree on the protocols or guidelines for the new science.

   * Thus, cloning or the production of identical human beings will be strictly
prohibited because it threatens several of the values already listed,
particularly that of individual uniqueness.

   * All attempts at human-animal hybridization, even though the motives be of
the highest calibre (for example, to enhance our night vision or our physical
stamina) must forever be taboo. In addition to ignoring the values cited, it
wrongly treats animals as though they have no rights and risks total distortion
of the animal kingdom.

   * Any experimenation aimed at "racial hygiene" or eugenics - the creation of
a superior, master race - will be always and everywhere illegal. Apart from the
sinister lessons of Hitler's Germany, this approach is immoral because it denies
the uniqueness and the essential humanity of all who fail to measure up. It
introduces a false value, that of perfection and raises the question: who
becomes the judge?

   * Any plans to design "humans" for special callings, as robot-like warriors,
for example, or as automatons for industry, mining, space travel or security
forces would be self-evidently immoral (ie. contrary to our criteria) and
therefore banned.

   * The same criteria would lead us to prevent any scheme aimed at changing our
nature genetically to make us pollution-resistant. For example, changing our
respiratory system or our digestive system so that we would breath the foulest
air and eat toxic foods would begin a process of changing our essential humanity
that is utterly unacceptable. It would mean the covering up of one injustice,
the degradation of the Earth's biosystems, by a second injustice, an ersatz
humanity.

   The point is that contrary to the naysayers and the alarmists we can reap the
benefits of genetic engineering and avoid the many risks if we're prepared to
work at it . Proper guidelines are possible. The fact that knowledge can be
sadly abused in no way prohibits its lawful use.

   * Tom Harpur is a Toronto author and broadcaster.


LOAD-DATE: January 11, 1993


                              183 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1993 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

               January 9, 1993, Saturday, SATURDAY SECOND EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 459 words

HEADLINE: Bourassa's cancer back after 2 years

BYLINE: By Robert McKenzie Toronto Star

DATELINE: QUEBEC CITY

BODY:

   QUEBEC CITY - Quebec Premier Robert Bourassa has had another cancer operation
and faces a tough decision on whether to remain in office while undergoing
further treatment.

   Bourassa, 59, is weighing the possibility of submitting to experimental gene
therapy to fight the melanoma (skin cancer) that has now recurred in his chest
and "other sites" of his body after a two-year remission.

   A brief "health bulletin" from his office yesterday afternoon revealed that
Bourassa had an operation three days ago at the National Cancer Institute in
Bethesda, Maryland, for the "removal of one tumor that had spread to the right
chest wall."

   The bulletin, signed by Dr. Steven A. Rosenberg, added: "Mr. Bourassa may
receive experimental treatments using interleukin-2 (IL-2)" developed at the
institute near Washington, D.C.

   Bourassa resumed his vacation with his family in Miami and intends to preside
over the regular Quebec cabinet meeting here next Wednesday, said press
secretary Sylvie Godin.

   Godin said follow-up treatment will require Bourassa's presence at Bethesda
once a month.

   The interleukin treatment, a speciality of Rosenberg's, involves extracting
white cells - which battle cancer - from an affected tumor, multiplying them in
a laboratory and re-injecting them in large quantities, along with a
cancer-killing gene, in the same patient.

   The few Quebec specialists who agreed to speak on the record yesterday said
the recurrence of the cancer that first hit Bourassa in 1990 - he underwent
three operations then - is a matter of grave concern.

   Dr. Pierre Ricard, president of the Quebec Association of Dermatologists,
said "the prognosis is bad" generally for patients with a recurrence of melanoma
after a one- or two-year remission.

   "It's pretty scary," Ricard said.

   "The interleukin treatment, which stimulates the immunitary system, remains
experimental. The chances of a cure remain relatively slim."

   Dr. Jean Latreille, head of the oncology department at Montreal's Hotel Dieu
hospital, said Bourassa would have to be put in "intensive care" if he undergoes
the interleukin treatment.

   The recurrence of the cancer was discovered on Dec. 23 when Bourassa had a
routine checkup in Montreal.

   In the previous days, he had given several media interviews saying he felt
well and had a clear bill of health.

   In the summer 1990, Bourassa delayed seeking treatment for a spot on his back
because he was involved in handling the Mohawk crisis at Oka and Kahnawake, near
Montreal.

   After surgery in Montreal in July, he had a melanoma removed from his back in
September at Bethesda and then underwent an "exploratory laparotomy" in
November, which resulted in complications and a severe loss of weight.

GRAPHIC: Photo: Robert Bourassa

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 1999


                              184 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1993 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                    January 9, 1993, Saturday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 455 words

HEADLINE: Bourassa's cancer back after 2 years

BYLINE: BY ROBERT MCKENZIE TORONTO STAR

DATELINE: QUEBEC CITYROBERT BOURASS BIOGRAPHY

BODY:

   Quebec Premier Robert Bourassa has had another cancer operation and faces a
tough decision on whether to remain in office while undergoing further
treatment.

   Bourassa, 59, is weighing the possibility of submitting to experimental gene
therapy to fight the melanoma (skin cancer) that has now recurred in his chest
and "other sites" of his body after a two-year remission.

   A brief "health bulletin" from his office yesterday afternoon revealed that
Bourassa had an operation three days ago at the National Cancer Institute in
Bethesda, Maryland, for the "removal of one tumor that had spread to the right
chest wall."

   The bulletin, signed by Dr. Steven A. Rosenberg, added: "Mr. Bourassa may
receive experimental treatments using interleukin-2 (IL-2)" developed at the
institute near Washington, D.C.

   Bourassa resumed his vacation with his family in Miami and intends to preside
over the regular Quebec cabinet meeting here next Wednesday, said press
secretary Sylvie Godin.

   Godin said follow-up treatment will require Bourassa's presence at Bethesda
once a month.

   The interleukin treatment, a speciality of Rosenberg's, involves extracting
white cells - which battle cancer - from an affected tumor, multiplying them in
a laboratory and re-injecting them in large quantities, along with a
cancer-killing gene, in the same patient.

   The few Quebec specialists who agreed to speak on the record yesterday said
the recurrence of the cancer that first hit Bourassa in 1990 - he underwent
three operations then - is a matter of grave concern.

   Dr. Pierre Ricard, president of the Quebec Association of Dermatologists,
said "the prognosis is bad" generally for patients with a recurrence of melanoma
after a one- or two-year remission.

   "It's pretty scary," Ricard said.

   "The interleukin treatment, which stimulates the immunitary system, remains
experimental. The chances of a cure remain relatively slim."

   Dr. Jean Latreille, head of the oncology department at Montreal's Hotel Dieu
hospital, said Bourassa would have to be put in "intensive care" if he undergoes
the interleukin treatment.

   The recurrence of the cancer was discovered on Dec. 23 when Bourassa had a
routine checkup in Montreal.

   In the previous days, he had given several media interviews saying he felt
well and had a clear bill of health.

   In the summer 1990, Bourassa delayed seeking treatment for a spot on his back
because he was involved in handling the Mohawk crisis at Oka and Kahnawake, near
Montreal.

   After surgery in Montreal in July, he had a melanoma removed from his back in
September at Bethesda and then underwent an "exploratory laparotomy" in
November, which resulted in complications and a severe loss of weight.


GRAPHIC: Photo: Robert Bourassa

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 1993


                              185 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1992 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                December 6, 1992, Sunday, SUNDAY SECOND EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A12

LENGTH: 546 words

HEADLINE: Scientists to try out therapy for cystic fibrosis

BYLINE: AP

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   WASHINGTON (AP) - An experimental gene therapy treatment that holds the
theoretical promise of a treatment for cystic fibrosis, the most common
inherited fatal disease, has been approved by a U.S. federal advisory committee.

   The Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee of the National Institutes of Health
recommended that two researchers be allowed to try to replace defective cystic
fibrosis genes in the lung cells of a small number of CF patients. They will use
a harmless common cold virus to carry the genes. A third researcher also seeks
approval.

   If the technique works as hoped, it could correct the genetic flaw that
causes respiratory CF symptoms and possibly cure the most lethal element of the
disease.

   In Toronto, the discoverer of the cystic fibrosis gene, Dr. Lap-Chee Tsui,
said patients will be excited to know the next step toward possible treatment
may begin soon.

   "Studies in mice and rats have indicated the potential of using a virus to
carry the gene into the lungs," he said. "But rodent lungs are different than
human lungs and the only way to find out if it will work the same in lung cells
of people is to try it in patients."

   Cathleen Morrison, executive director of the Canadian Cystic Fibrosis
Foundation, said, "This is a pretty important day. I'm very excited." However,
she cautioned, the safety of the procedure must be assured before it can be used
widely.

   In Washington, the NIH advisory committee approved gene therapy proposals by
Ronald Crystal of the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, an NIH agency,
and by James Wilson of the University of Michigan. Michael Welsh of the
University of Iowa is the third researcher.

   All three plan to use a genetically altered cold virus to try to correct the
flawed CF gene. The viruses have been engineered to carry the normal CF gene and
have been rendered unable to reproduce, or cause infection, in the patients.

   The proposals call for the altered virus to be sprayed into the nose or lungs
of the CF patients. The virus is expected to insert the normal CF gene into the
cells of the pulmonary tract, thus correcting the genetic flaw. Other cells in
the body will not be genetically altered.

   Under the proposals, Crystal will use the technique in 10 patients, Wilson in
12 and Welsh in three.

   Robert Beall, a vice president of the United States Cystic Fibrosis
Foundation, which provided money for the genetic research, said patients for all
three experimental procedures have been selected. They are all over age 18 and
have mild to moderate CF in their lungs, he said.

   The work could begin as early as next month, he said.

   Cystic fibrosis kills principally by causing an extreme buildup in the lungs
of a thick mucus that interferes with breathing. That fosters repeated pulmonary
infections, which eventually destroy the lungs.

   A defective or non-functioning CF gene prevents cells from properly
processing chloride, leading to an imbalance of salt, which prevents the body
from disposing of the mucus. In addition to affecting the lungs, excess mucus
also can affect the intestines and the pancreas, leading to digestive symptoms.

   About 3,000 Canadians have the disease.

   * With files from Marilyn DunlopUnited; States; research; genetics

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 1999


                              186 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1992 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                   December 5, 1992, Saturday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. H1

LENGTH: 1635 words

HEADLINE: Unlocking the secrets of old age

BYLINE: BY DEBRA BLACK TORONTO STAR

BODY:


    WHAT IS the natural life span for a man or a woman?

   One hundred years? One hundred and twenty years? How about 200 years?

   Are aging and death inevitable?

   For centuries, scientists and philosophers have pondered these questions,
seeking answers in the starry skies of the universe.

   Some, like 15th century Spanish explorer Juan Ponce de Leon, travelled
halfway around the world in search of the mythical "fountain of youth."

   But so far, the mystery of aging remains still that: an elusive puzzle.

   Today, the fountain of youth is seen by many as folly, a preposterous idea.

   Yet international researchers and scientists remain fascinated with the idea
of youth, aging and death. They are on a quest of their own, turning to the
world of molecular biology for an answer to the mystery of aging.

   "I don't think in the next decade or two there's going to be any new medicine
that will have any significant impact on increasing our maximum longevity," says
Calvin Harley, a professor at McMaster University and one of a handful of
Canadian molecular biologists in the field of aging.

   But, he says, it may be possible to unlock the genetic secret that makes a
cell age and cause, for example, a specific disease like hardening of the
arteries. Moreover, in theory it may be possible to postpone that aging process
or even turn it off and prevent the disease.

   So Harley and others keep pushing, trying to understand why men and women
age, and how they age?

   In laboratories, universities and private research foundations across North
America, hundreds, if not thousands, of scientists and researchers are working
on small pieces of the puzzle.

   They're looking at diets, exercise, vitamin supplements, hormones, the immune
system, the brain, cells, genes, the heart, free radicals and anti-oxidants. The
list is endless, as are the theories.

   But the prize is a particularly golden one: the key to longevity.

   If these scientists have their way, most, if not all, men and women will be
able to lead healthy, happy, productive lives well into their 100s and perhaps
beyond.

   "When many elderly people reach 80 years to 100, they spend the last years of
their life with diseases," says Harley. "If we could slow down the aging process
(in different cells) we might be able to postpone those diseases that
individuals are susceptible to such as atherosclerosis."

   "We want to look at the molecular events of aging to maximize the human life
span," says Dr. Eugenia Wong, director of the Bloomfield Centre for Research in
Aging affiliated with Montreal's Jewish General Hospital and McGill University.

   "Human beings have a maximum life span of 100 to 120 years, theoretically. We
don't want people to be totally disabled in their 100s. We want them healthy and
functional."

   Already, an increasing number of Canadians are living longer than their
ancestors.

   According to Statistics Canada,there are about 3,700 people aged 100 years or
older now. That's three times as 20 years ago and it may double in another 20
years.

   Many scientists are trying to study why or how these centenarians have been
able to beat the odds and live as long as they have - they had only a one in
three chance of ever reaching 65 when they were born.

   Many of them attribute their long life to a good immune system, a balanced
lifestyle and a strong personality.

   But why some people live to be 100 and beyond while other men and women
succumb to the ravages of time at 70, 75 or 80 isn't clear.

   Nor is it really understood why some seniors are struck down with crippling
diseases and others aren't.

   These are just some of the questions researchers hope they will be able to
answer as they investigate the secrets of aging.

   With Canada's population aging rapidly, scientists have a compelling reason
to understand the riddle of aging.

   By 2031 studies project that nearly 24 per cent of Canadians - more than 7
million men and women - will be over the age of 65. Many of them could be in
ill- health, taxing both the medical and social service communities.

   "If molecular biology of aging can come up with drugs, gene therapy or
diagnostic therapy then we're ahead of the game and it will be helpful for
society," Wong says.

   But first scientists have to understand what happens when men and women age?

   Studies suggest usually the body changes in visible ways as men and women
age. Gray or thinning hair, diminished vision and hearing, wrinkled and sagging
skin, poor memory, shrinking height and body mass are all associated with aging.

   So why does the body age? Researchers are investigating two very different
theories. The most popular hypothesis suggests that each cell in our body has a
kind of genetic internal clock which tells cells to stop dividing and eventually
die.

   Another hypothesis says the body eventually succumbs to long-term wear and
tear. Some scientists believe even such simple biological functions as breathing
can wreak havoc by creating toxic byproducts called free radicals. These
eventually cause long-term destruction on organs, and lead to aging and death.

   Others believe that the pituitary gland releases a kind of death hormone
which causes our demise. Meanwhile, some researchers think nutrition may hold
the key to aging.

   Some, like the University of Colorado's Thomas Johnson, a molecular
biologist, and Michael Rose, a biologist at the University of California,
believe they may be on the trail of the longevity gene.

   One day, they think, it may be possible to extend the natural life span of
men and women beyond 120 years.

   Johnson has been able to develop a special strain of worm that lives about 70
per cent longer than the worm's average life span of three weeks. Rose, too, has
developed a special strain of fruit fly that lives 80 days or twice the average
life of a fly.

   McMaster's Harley believes our cells have an internal clock that start the
aging process.

   Some of his latest research backs up that hypothesis. Working with Dr. Carol
Greider and Dr. Bruce Futcher of Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory in New York,
Harley has found a kind of internal clock that helps regulate cell division and
eventually tells cells when to die.

   They've found that as cells split, the ends of the chromosomes in those cells
get shorter and shorter. "A small part of the DNA at the tip of the chromosome
is lost every time a cell divides . . . it provides a kind of internal clock."

   But what is the causal relationship between this loss at the tip of the
chromosome and cell death?

   Harley doesn't know yet. But he has some suspicions. "It could compromise the
integrity of the chromosome and could lead to chromosomal abnormalities," he
says.

   In turn these abnormalities could cause the cells to stop dividing or
repairing any damaged tissue. Eventually the cells and the organism would die.

   Harley, his team and a new collaborator, Dr. Silvia Bacchetti, a pathologist
at McMaster, looked at cancer cells and why they never die. Many consider the
disease "the flipside of aging" since cancer cells are immortal. They found
cancer cells reactivate a special enzyme, telomerase, which maintains the length
of the chromosomes during cell division.

   Harley and others speculate that if there is a way to block the production of
this enzyme there might be a way to control the cancer cells, leading to a new
way to treat cancer.

   In theory it may also be possible to use this special enzyme to prevent the
demise of normal cells.

   Meanwhile, at the Bloomfield Centre for Research in Aging, Eugenia Wong heads
a team of seven researchers all studying the molecular process of aging.

   Wong, a professor of medicine at McGill specializing in cell biology, is
concentrating on studying colon cells and colon cancer, which has the second
highest mortality rate of all cancers and is a serious killer of the elderly.

   So far, she has found a number of genes that are associated with the normal
aging process of colon cells. And she hopes she will be able to find out whether
the absence of these genes could be used as a diagnostic marker.

   Her colleagues at the research centre are exploring other aspects of aging.
One is looking at the impact of free radicals on the brain and its relationship
to Parkinson's disease. Another is looking at memory loss and Alzheimer's. And
another team has developed a transgenic mouse, specially bred with a heart
attack gene.

   The team hopes to figure out how to turn off this gene and prevent heart
attacks, leading one day to the development of a drug or even gene therapy for
the prevention of heart disease.

   So where will all this research lead? Is a pill or potion for eternal life on
the horizon?

   Wong and Harley doubt it.

   That's not what's motivating most researchers, Wong says. What she, Harley
and many others share is a commitment to curing or postponing the diseases of
old age.

   Wong would like to see men and women live out their natural life span to 100
or 120 years in good health and functioning well, playing golf or tennis daily.

   Now, wouldn't that be something, she muses.

   Harley shares her sentiments: "Aging isn't like a genetic disease caused by a
mutation in a single gene. It is a process that has evolved over millions of
years, involving hundreds, if not thousands, of genes.

   "What I see as the application of new knowledge of aging is the postponement
of age-related diseases which would lead us to live a more productive functional
life."

   * MONDAY: The ethical considerations of extending people's life spans; how
some very active seniors stay so fit.

   * TUESDAY: The quest for miracle cures and the millions we spend to fight the
aging process.

   * THURSDAY: What will happen as the baby boom generation reaches retirement?


GRAPHIC: Drawing (Raffi Anderian): woman

LOAD-DATE: December 6, 1992


                              187 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1992 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

              December 5, 1992, Saturday, SATURDAY SECOND EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. H1

LENGTH: 1639 words

HEADLINE: Unlocking the secrets of old age

BYLINE: By Debra Black Toronto Star

BODY:

   WHAT IS the natural life span for a man or a woman?

   One hundred years? One hundred and twenty years? How about 200 years?

   Are aging and death inevitable?

   For centuries, scientists and philosophers have pondered these questions,
seeking answers in the starry skies of the universe.

   Some, like 15th century Spanish explorer Juan Ponce de Leon, travelled
halfway around the world in search of the mythical "fountain of youth."

   But so far, the mystery of aging remains still that: an elusive puzzle.

   Today, the fountain of youth is seen by many as folly, a preposterous idea.

   Yet international researchers and scientists remain fascinated with the idea
of youth, aging and death. They are on a quest of their own, turning to the
world of molecular biology for an answer to the mystery of aging.

   "I don't think in the next decade or two there's going to be any new medicine
that will have any significant impact on increasing our maximum longevity," says
Calvin Harley, a professor at McMaster University and one of a handful of
Canadian molecular biologists in the field of aging.

   But, he says, it may be possible to unlock the genetic secret that makes a
cell age and cause, for example, a specific disease like hardening of the
arteries. Moreover, in theory it may be possible to postpone that aging process
or even turn it off and prevent the disease.

   So Harley and others keep pushing, trying to understand why men and women
age, and how they age?

   In laboratories, universities and private research foundations across North
America, hundreds, if not thousands, of scientists and researchers are working
on small pieces of the puzzle.

   They're looking at diets, exercise, vitamin supplements, hormones, the immune
system, the brain, cells, genes, the heart, free radicals and anti-oxidants. The
list is endless, as are the theories.

   But the prize is a particularly golden one: the key to longevity.

   If these scientists have their way, most, if not all, men and women will be
able to lead healthy, happy, productive lives well into their 100s and perhaps
beyond.

   "When many elderly people reach 80 years to 100, they spend the last years of
their life with diseases," says Harley. "If we could slow down the aging process
(in different cells) we might be able to postpone those diseases that
individuals are susceptible to such as atherosclerosis."

   "We want to look at the molecular events of aging to maximize the human life
span," says Dr. Eugenia Wong, director of the Bloomfield Centre for Research in
Aging affiliated with Montreal's Jewish General Hospital and McGill University.

   "Human beings have a maximum life span of 100 to 120 years, theoretically. We
don't want people to be totally disabled in their 100s. We want them healthy and
functional."

   Already, an increasing number of Canadians are living longer than their
ancestors.

   According to Statistics Canada,there are about 3,700 people aged 100 years or
older now. That's three times as 20 years ago and it may double in another 20
years.

   Many scientists are trying to study why or how these centenarians have been
able to beat the odds and live as long as they have - they had only a one in
three chance of ever reaching 65 when they were born.

   Many of them attribute their long life to a good immune system, a balanced
lifestyle and a strong personality.

   But why some people live to be 100 and beyond while other men and women
succumb to the ravages of time at 70, 75 or 80 isn't clear.

   Nor is it really understood why some seniors are struck down with crippling
diseases and others aren't.

   These are just some of the questions researchers hope they will be able to
answer as they investigate the secrets of aging.

   With Canada's population aging rapidly, scientists have a compelling reason
to understand the riddle of aging.

   By 2031 studies project that nearly 24 per cent of Canadians - more than 7
million men and women - will be over the age of 65. Many of them could be in
ill- health, taxing both the medical and social service communities.

   "If molecular biology of aging can come up with drugs, gene therapy or
diagnostic therapy then we're ahead of the game and it will be helpful for
society," Wong says.

   But first scientists have to understand what happens when men and women age?

   Studies suggest usually the body changes in visible ways as men and women
age. Gray or thinning hair, diminished vision and hearing, wrinkled and sagging
skin, poor memory, shrinking height and body mass are all associated with aging.

   So why does the body age? Researchers are investigating two very different
theories. The most popular hypothesis suggests that each cell in our body has a
kind of genetic internal clock which tells cells to stop dividing and eventually
die.

   Another hypothesis says the body eventually succumbs to long-term wear and
tear. Some scientists believe even such simple biological functions as breathing
can wreak havoc by creating toxic byproducts called free radicals. These
eventually cause long-term destruction on organs, and lead to aging and death.

   Others believe that the pituitary gland releases a kind of death hormone
which causes our demise. Meanwhile, some researchers think nutrition may hold
the key to aging.

   Some, like the University of Colorado's Thomas Johnson, a molecular
biologist, and Michael Rose, a biologist at the University of California,
believe they may be on the trail of the longevity gene.

   One day, they think, it may be possible to extend the natural life span of
men and women beyond 120 years.

   Johnson has been able to develop a special strain of worm that lives about 70
per cent longer than the worm's average life span of three weeks. Rose, too, has
developed a special strain of fruit fly that lives 80 days or twice the average
life of a fly.

   McMaster's Harley believes our cells have an internal clock that start the
aging process.

   Some of his latest research backs up that hypothesis. Working with Dr. Carol
Greider and Dr. Bruce Futcher of Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory in New York,
Harley has found a kind of internal clock that helps regulate cell division and
eventually tells cells when to die.

   They've found that as cells split, the ends of the chromosomes in those cells
get shorter and shorter. "A small part of the DNA at the tip of the chromosome
is lost every time a cell divides . . . it provides a kind of internal clock."

   But what is the causal relationship between this loss at the tip of the
chromosome and cell death?

   Harley doesn't know yet. But he has some suspicions. "It could compromise the
integrity of the chromosome and could lead to chromosomal abnormalities," he
says.

   In turn these abnormalities could cause the cells to stop dividing or
repairing any damaged tissue. Eventually the cells and the organism would die.

   Harley, his team and a new collaborator, Dr. Silvia Bacchetti, a pathologist
at McMaster, looked at cancer cells and why they never die. Many consider the
disease "the flipside of aging" since cancer cells are immortal. They found
cancer cells reactivate a special enzyme, telomerase, which maintains the length
of the chromosomes during cell division.

   Harley and others speculate that if there is a way to block the production of
this enzyme there might be a way to control the cancer cells, leading to a new
way to treat cancer.

   In theory it may also be possible to use this special enzyme to prevent the
demise of normal cells.

   Meanwhile, at the Bloomfield Centre for Research in Aging, Eugenia Wong heads
a team of seven researchers all studying the molecular process of aging.

   Wong, a professor of medicine at McGill specializing in cell biology, is
concentrating on studying colon cells and colon cancer, which has the second
highest mortality rate of all cancers and is a serious killer of the elderly.

   So far, she has found a number of genes that are associated with the normal
aging process of colon cells. And she hopes she will be able to find out whether
the absence of these genes could be used as a diagnostic marker.

   Her colleagues at the research centre are exploring other aspects of aging.
One is looking at the impact of free radicals on the brain and its relationship
to Parkinson's disease. Another is looking at memory loss and Alzheimer's. And
another team has developed a transgenic mouse, specially bred with a heart
attack gene.

   The team hopes to figure out how to turn off this gene and prevent heart
attacks, leading one day to the development of a drug or even gene therapy for
the prevention of heart disease.

   So where will all this research lead? Is a pill or potion for eternal life on
the horizon?

   Wong and Harley doubt it.

   That's not what's motivating most researchers, Wong says. What she, Harley
and many others share is a commitment to curing or postponing the diseases of
old age.

   Wong would like to see men and women live out their natural life span to 100
or 120 years in good health and functioning well, playing golf or tennis daily.

   Now, wouldn't that be something, she muses.

   Harley shares her sentiments: "Aging isn't like a genetic disease caused by a
mutation in a single gene. It is a process that has evolved over millions of
years, involving hundreds, if not thousands, of genes.

   "What I see as the application of new knowledge of aging is the postponement
of age-related diseases which would lead us to live a more productive functional
life."

   * MONDAY: The ethical considerations of extending people's life spans; how
some very active seniors stay so fit.

   * TUESDAY: The quest for miracle cures and the millions we spend to fight the
aging process.

   * THURSDAY: What will happen as the baby boom generation reaches retirement?

   First of 4 parts. See related story on page H1.

GRAPHIC: Drawing (Raffi Anderian): womanAging:; The; Issues; The; Ethics;
series; aged; longevity

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 1999


                              188 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1992 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                    November 27, 1992, Friday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A3

LENGTH: 338 words

HEADLINE: Genetic therapy against AIDS does well in lab tests

BYLINE: AP

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   WASHINGTON (AP) - Researchers today reported they have found a way of
preventing the deadly AIDS virus from reproducing inside its favorite blood cell
target - at least in a test tube.

   Three scientists writing in the journal Science said AIDS resistance could be
inserted into the blood cells using another type of virus that carries altered
genes.

   Work is under way now to test the technique in animals.

   No human trials are planned until the animal experiments are completed, the
researchers said in a statement.

   The scientists inserted into an infection particle called adeno-associated
virus, or AAV, a gene that would stick to a specific part of the genetic pattern
contained in the human immunodeficiency virus that causes AIDS.

   Healthy blood cells, called CD4 cells, which are the favorite target of HIV,
then were infected with the AAV virus. This caused the new gene to be
incorporated into genetic pattern of the CD4 cell.

   When HIV virus was exposed in a laboratory culture to the altered CD4 cells,
only a few of the viruses could grow or reproduce. In unaltered CD4 cells,
cultured for comparison, the HIV was able to replicate, the study says.

   Untreated CD4 cells reproduced about 1,000 times more HIV virus than the CD4
cells with the altered genetic pattern, the study said.

   The researchers said the work showed that the AAV virus was an effective way
to carry a new gene into blood cells. The AAV is taken up by the blood cells and
the virus then inserts the new gene into the nucleus of the cell.

   When the HIV virus enters the cell and tries to take over the nucleus, it is
met by the new gene. The researchers said the new gene acts like a shield that
blocks key processes the HIV must perform in order to reproduce.

   The study was conducted by Saswati Chatterjee and Dr. K.K. Wong of the City
of Hope National Medical Centre in Duarte, Calif., and by Dr. Philip R. Johnson
of Children's Hospital at Ohio State University, Columbus.United; States;
genetics; research; AIDS

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 1999


                              189 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1992 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                    November 1, 1992, Sunday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: FEATURE; Pg. 128

LENGTH: 320 words

HEADLINE: LAP-CHEE TSUI BORN - 1950 TAMING THE WHOLE TIGER

BODY:


    On August 24, 1989, The Hospital for Sick Children was the most exciting
place in Canada.

   It was the day Dr. Lap-Chee Tsui announced at an emotion-laden press
conference that he and his colleagues had identified the gene that causes cystic
fibrosis, one of the most common life-threatening inherited diseases.

   For four years, an international race to find the gene had scientists sitting
on the edge of their chairs awaiting the outcome.

   "It was like looking for a house with a dripping faucet without knowing the
address," Tsui explained on the day of the historic announcement.

   Dr. Ronald Worton, geneticist-in-chief at the hospital, called the finding
"potential Nobel-prize winning work." It was the most important medical finding
made in Toronto since the discovery of insulin.

   Born in China, Tsui came to the University of Toronto to work in the
laboratory of Dr. Manuel Buchwald, a geneticist at the Hospital for Sick
Children, in 1981. They began their search for the elusive cystic fibrosis gene
using genetic material supplied by some 50 Canadian families who had two or more
children with cystic fibrosis.

   To speed up his search, Tsui enlisted the help of Francis Collins at the
University of Michigan, who had developed a more efficient technique for
examining DNA.

   DNA is like a spiral ladder with he rungs made of base pairs. It would turn
out that the cystic fibrosis gene was formed of 250,000 base pairs. At first
Tsui could get hold of only 100 of them. "If the gene had been a tiger, the 100
base pairs would not even have been the tail. They'd have been a few hairs," he
said. But he hung on and bit by bit the team got the whole gene.

   In the three years since the discovery, great strides have been made toward
correcting the gene defect by gene therapy. It could involve spraying into the
respiratory tract a harmless virus carrying healthy genes to insert into cells.


GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Lap-Chee Tsui

LOAD-DATE: November 2, 1992


                              190 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1992 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                November 1, 1992, Sunday, SUNDAY SECOND EDITION

SECTION: FEATURE; Pg. 128

LENGTH: 320 words

HEADLINE: LAP-CHEE TSUI BORN - 1950 TAMING THE WHOLE TIGER

BODY:

   On August 24, 1989, The Hospital for Sick Children was the most exciting
place in Canada.

   It was the day Dr. Lap-Chee Tsui announced at an emotion-laden press
conference that he and his colleagues had identified the gene that causes cystic
fibrosis, one of the most common life-threatening inherited diseases.

   For four years, an international race to find the gene had scientists sitting
on the edge of their chairs awaiting the outcome.

   "It was like looking for a house with a dripping faucet without knowing the
address," Tsui explained on the day of the historic announcement.

   Dr. Ronald Worton, geneticist-in-chief at the hospital, called the finding
"potential Nobel-prize winning work." It was the most important medical finding
made in Toronto since the discovery of insulin.

   Born in China, Tsui came to the University of Toronto to work in the
laboratory of Dr. Manuel Buchwald, a geneticist at the Hospital for Sick
Children, in 1981. They began their search for the elusive cystic fibrosis gene
using genetic material supplied by some 50 Canadian families who had two or more
children with cystic fibrosis.

   To speed up his search, Tsui enlisted the help of Francis Collins at the
University of Michigan, who had developed a more efficient technique for
examining DNA.

   DNA is like a spiral ladder with he rungs made of base pairs. It would turn
out that the cystic fibrosis gene was formed of 250,000 base pairs. At first
Tsui could get hold of only 100 of them. "If the gene had been a tiger, the 100
base pairs would not even have been the tail. They'd have been a few hairs," he
said. But he hung on and bit by bit the team got the whole gene.

   In the three years since the discovery, great strides have been made toward
correcting the gene defect by gene therapy. It could involve spraying into the
respiratory tract a harmless virus carrying healthy genes to insert into cells.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Lap-Chee TsuiStar; Centennial; Magazine; The; Hundred; Lap-Chee;
Tsui; age

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 1999


                              191 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1992 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                    October 6, 1992, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A7

LENGTH: 757 words

HEADLINE: It's about time (1)

BYLINE: COMPILED BY WALTER STEFANIUK TORONTO STAR

BODY:


    Is high noon 12 p.m. or 12 a.m. and, conversely, is midnight 12 a.m. or 12
p.m.

   "Neither," said Dr. Kristian Lippincott, head of the old Royal 1Observatory
in Greenwich, England, where lies the brass strip that marks the ancient zero
Meridian Line, the base for measurements of the Earth's time and longitudes.

   A.M. in Latin is ante meridiem and means before noon and p.m. is post
meridiem or after noon. "Therefore noon is the point which is neither 'before'
nor 'after.' It is the point at which 'before' becomes 'after,' " Lippincott
said. "It is the same with midnight. We have two points, if you like, that are
turning points."

   These instants are expressed as 12 noon and 12 midnight, or simply as noon
and midnight. That's how they're stated in books on horology, the study of time,
says Karon Anderson, administrative assistant at the Time Museum in Rockford,
Ill.

   About time (2)

   Why do clocks run "clockwise"

   That's the direction the shadow rotates on sundials in the northern
hemisphere, according to Why Do Clocks Run Clockwise a book on "imponderables."
(Its title was given incorrectly on Thursday).

   If clocks had been invented in the southern hemisphere, the hands no doubt
would run in the opposite direction.

   Why are clock hands shown in the 10 after 10 position in advertisements

   "For cosmetic reasons and balance," said Julia King of the Clock
Manufacturing and Marketing Association in Naperville, Ill., after confirming
the answer with the people at the Time Museum in Rockford, Ill.

   Quick Q and A

   Where do I send a donation to Hurricane Andrew victims in Florida

   Make out a cheque to the Canadian Red Cross Society and at the bottom
designate "Hurricane Andrew Relief." Send it to any branch of the agency, or:
Canadian Red Cross, Ontario Division, 5700 Cancross Court, Mississauga, Ont.,
L5R 3E9. You can do the same for any of the agency's aid efforts, such as
Somalia relief.

   How did St. Pierre and Miquelon vote in the French referendum on the European
Community's unity package, the Maastricht treaty

   In round figures, 64 per cent voted yes and 36 per cent voted no out of 335
votes cast on the tiny French islands off the south coast of Newfoundland. In
the rest of France, the vote was approximately 51-49 for. 24-hour line

   Call 868-3900 to record your questions and comments for You Asked Us. That's
also the automated line to answer our Yes or No question.

   Yes or No

   From what you've read or observed of the issues and actions, do you support
Metro police officers in their work-to-rule against the provincial government

   Dial 868-3900 with your yes or no by 10 a.m. tomorrow. Results on Thursday.

   No superkids

   Thursday's question was: Should gene therapy be used to improve the
intelligence and physical appearance of children of the future

   Yes 22%

   No 78%

   (220 calls)

   It's inhuman. Medical science should be putting its resources toward solving
problems, not creating new ones.

   It has the potential to be beneficial, if accessible to all, especially to
solve genetic medical problems.

   It's a disgusting thought. Just watch, it won't be long before a Hitler-type
guy in power wants to mass-produce blonde-haired, blue-eyed children again .

   It should be allowed only for the removal of crippling genetic diseases.
Other than that, no, we shouldn't interfere with God's plan.

   No. You could look like Michael Jackson.

   Yes, as long as we can be sure normal offspring will never be second-class
citizens, or serfs and slaves, to the new bright and beautiful race. The problem
is, how do we prevent that

   We're opening up a Pandora's box with genetic engineering.

   Yes. We have been created by genetic engineering to begin with by our
ancestors (mating). My feeling is that gene therapy will bring beneficial
results to humanity.

   We are all beautiful in God's eyes. We don't need man-made manipulation to
create yet another divisive system, beauty vs. ugly. What's ugly anyway

   Yes. Then maybe we'll get rid of dropouts, as well as thieves, murderers and
rapists.

   No. Frankenstein was trying to invent the perfect human being and look what
happened to him.

   Anything that benefits mankind should be done, with moderation.

   Calendar

   Birthdate of British general Sir Isaac Brock, War of 1812 hero, 1769 U.S.
journalist Henry Chadwick, developed baseball's scoring system as member of
first rules committee, 1824 radio's inventor and first broadcaster Reginald
Aubrey Fessenden, near East Bolton, Que., 1866.

   Compiled by Walter Stefaniuk


LOAD-DATE: October 7, 1992


                              192 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1992 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                          October 6, 1992, Tuesday, AM

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A7

LENGTH: 762 words

HEADLINE: It's about time (1)

BYLINE: Compiled by Walter Stefaniuk Toronto Star

BODY:

   Is high noon 12 p.m. or 12 a.m. and, conversely, is midnight 12 a.m. or 12
p.m.?

   "Neither," said Dr. Kristian Lippincott, head of the old Royal 1Observatory
in Greenwich, England, where lies the brass strip that marks the ancient zero
Meridian Line, the base for measurements of the Earth's time and longitudes.

   A.M. in Latin is ante meridiem and means before noon and p.m. is post
meridiem or after noon. "Therefore noon is the point which is neither 'before'
nor 'after.' It is the point at which 'before' becomes 'after,' " Lippincott
said. "It is the same with midnight. We have two points, if you like, that are
turning points."

   These instants are expressed as 12 noon and 12 midnight, or simply as noon
and midnight. That's how they're stated in books on horology, the study of time,
says Karon Anderson, administrative assistant at the Time Museum in Rockford,
Ill.

   About time (2)

   Why do clocks run "clockwise"?

   That's the direction the shadow rotates on sundials in the northern
hemisphere, according to Why Do Clocks Run Clockwise? a book on "imponderables."
(Its title was given incorrectly on Thursday).

   If clocks had been invented in the southern hemisphere, the hands no doubt
would run in the opposite direction.

   Why are clock hands shown in the 10 after 10 position in advertisements?

   "For cosmetic reasons and balance," said Julia King of the Clock
Manufacturing and Marketing Association in Naperville, Ill., after confirming
the answer with the people at the Time Museum in Rockford, Ill.

   Quick Q and A

   Where do I send a donation to Hurricane Andrew victims in Florida?

   Make out a cheque to the Canadian Red Cross Society and at the bottom
designate "Hurricane Andrew Relief." Send it to any branch of the agency, or:
Canadian Red Cross, Ontario Division, 5700 Cancross Court, Mississauga, Ont.,
L5R 3E9. You can do the same for any of the agency's aid efforts, such as
Somalia relief.

   How did St. Pierre and Miquelon vote in the French referendum on the European
Community's unity package, the Maastricht treaty?

   In round figures, 64 per cent voted yes and 36 per cent voted no out of 335
votes cast on the tiny French islands off the south coast of Newfoundland. In
the rest of France, the vote was approximately 51-49 for. 24-hour line

   Call 868-3900 to record your questions and comments for You Asked Us. That's
also the automated line to answer our Yes or No question.

   Yes or No

   From what you've read or observed of the issues and actions, do you support
Metro police officers in their work-to-rule against the provincial government?

   Dial 868-3900 with your yes or no by 10 a.m. tomorrow. Results on Thursday.

   No superkids

   Thursday's question was: Should gene therapy be used to improve the
intelligence and physical appearance of children of the future?

   Yes 22%

   No 78%

   (220 calls)

   It's inhuman. Medical science should be putting its resources toward solving
problems, not creating new ones.

   It has the potential to be beneficial, if accessible to all, especially to
solve genetic medical problems.

   It's a disgusting thought. Just watch, it won't be long before a Hitler-type
guy in power wants to mass-produce blonde-haired, blue-eyed children again .

   It should be allowed only for the removal of crippling genetic diseases.
Other than that, no, we shouldn't interfere with God's plan.

   No. You could look like Michael Jackson.

   Yes, as long as we can be sure normal offspring will never be second-class
citizens, or serfs and slaves, to the new bright and beautiful race. The problem
is, how do we prevent that?

   We're opening up a Pandora's box with genetic engineering.

   Yes. We have been created by genetic engineering to begin with by our
ancestors (mating). My feeling is that gene therapy will bring beneficial
results to humanity.

   We are all beautiful in God's eyes. We don't need man-made manipulation to
create yet another divisive system, beauty vs. ugly. What's ugly anyway?

   Yes. Then maybe we'll get rid of dropouts, as well as thieves, murderers and
rapists.

   No. Frankenstein was trying to invent the perfect human being and look what
happened to him.

   Anything that benefits mankind should be done, with moderation.

   Calendar

   Birthdate of British general Sir Isaac Brock, War of 1812 hero, 1769; U.S.
journalist Henry Chadwick, developed baseball's scoring system as member of
first rules committee, 1824; radio's inventor and first broadcaster Reginald
Aubrey Fessenden, near East Bolton, Que., 1866.

   Compiled by Walter StefaniukYou; Asked; Us

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 1999


                              193 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1992 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                    October 1, 1992, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A7

LENGTH: 639 words

HEADLINE: You Asked Us The 868-3900 line to your desk at The Star 12 hotdogs,
eight buns

BYLINE: COMPILED BY WALTER STEFANIUK TORONTO STAR

BODY:


    Q Why do hotdogs come in packs of 12 but buns are sold in eights I can't
figure it out

   A About half a century ago, in the early years of supermarkets, meat-packing
companies began selling frankfurters and wieners in packages weighing one pound
(almost half a kilogram). About 10 or 12 made up a pound, depending on size.
While butcher shops sold hotdogs in any quantity requested, by-the-pound was
simply the most efficient and convenient way of mass-marketing them.

   Bakeries, however, sold buns to stores in packages of eight - four on four -
because rolls traditionally were baked in clusters of four in pans designed to
hold eight rolls. That was the most efficient and convenient way for them. Pans
holding a dozen buns are still rather difficult to obtain, according to Why Do
Clocks Run BackWards, a book on "imponderables."

   Nowadays, though, shoppers occasionally find buns in packages of 12 or
extra-large hotdogs in packages of eight or even four.

   During the Middle Ages, Frankfurt in Germany and Vienna (Wien) in Austria
became famous for their cured pork and beef "dachshund sausages." Hence the
aliases frankfurter, wiener and hotdog. The elongated, sliced hotdog bun evolved
about the turn of the century from the bread and rolls with which street vendors
had long wrapped the heated little sausages.

   Harsh blow

   Q Why was Iniki, which caused so much damage in Hawaii, called a hurricane
rather than a typhoon

   A "The systems are called typhoons west of the international dateline in the
western North Pacific, and east of that line they are called hurricanes," said
meteorologist Jack Beven at the U.S. National Hurricane Centre in Coral Gables,
Fla.

   Typhoon is an east Asian word for violent tropical cyclones and hurricane is
the North American term for them.

   Quick Q and A

   What does ISBN stand for as an acronym in books

   International Standard Book Number, an official designation for cataloguing .

   24-hour line

   Call 868-3900 to record your questions and comments for You Asked Us. That's
also the automated line to answer our Yes or No question.

   Yes or No

   Should gene therapy be used to improve the intelligence and physical
appearance of children of the future

   Dial 868-3900 with your yes or no by 10 a.m. tomorrow. Results on Tuesday.

   Texas tycoon

   Tuesday's question was: As a neighbor, would you like to see Texas
billionaire Ross Perot become president of the U.S.

   Yes 52% No 48% (408 calls)

   His ability to create billions would make him an excellent manager of its
national affairs.

   No. Ross Perot doesn't know the first thing about democracy. This is apparent
when his views are questioned.

   Why not They've had a peanut farmer, a B-movie actor, the head of the CIA.
Let's try a billionaire for a change.

   I'm thinking he can't be trusted and is making a fool of the American people.

   When you have mildew and dry rot in your home, you open the doors and windows
to let fresh air in. Yes, I'd vote for Perot. He might clean up the mess, and it
smells bad.

   He has been so indecisive on whether to run for the presidency of the U.S.
that he would hardly be the best candidate for such an important and powerful
position, which requires one to take forceful and decisive action on national
and international issues.

   He would shake up the U.S. a little and hopefully rub off on Canada, with our
high deficits.

   No. He's a megalomaniac with fascist leanings.

   Calendar

   Civil law replaces military rule in Canada on this date in 1764 Austria
issues world's first postcards, 1869 first baseball "World's Series" opens,
sponsored by New York World newspaper, 1903 Henry Ford introduces his Model T
auto, selling at $ 850, 1908, People's Republic of China proclaimed, 1949
Mikhail Gorbachev becomes Soviet president, 1988.

   Compiled by Walter Stefaniuk



LOAD-DATE: October 2, 1992


                              194 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1992 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                         October 1, 1992, Thursday, AM

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A7

LENGTH: 642 words

HEADLINE: You Asked Us The 868-3900 line to your desk at The Star 12 hotdogs,
eight buns

BYLINE: Compiled by Walter Stefaniuk TORONTO STAR

BODY:

   Q Why do hotdogs come in packs of 12 but buns are sold in eights? I can't
figure it out?

   A About half a century ago, in the early years of supermarkets, meat-packing
companies began selling frankfurters and wieners in packages weighing one pound
(almost half a kilogram). About 10 or 12 made up a pound, depending on size.
While butcher shops sold hotdogs in any quantity requested, by-the-pound was
simply the most efficient and convenient way of mass-marketing them.

   Bakeries, however, sold buns to stores in packages of eight - four on four -
because rolls traditionally were baked in clusters of four in pans designed to
hold eight rolls. That was the most efficient and convenient way for them. Pans
holding a dozen buns are still rather difficult to obtain, according to Why Do
Clocks Run BackWards, a book on "imponderables."

   Nowadays, though, shoppers occasionally find buns in packages of 12 or
extra-large hotdogs in packages of eight or even four.

   During the Middle Ages, Frankfurt in Germany and Vienna (Wien) in Austria
became famous for their cured pork and beef "dachshund sausages." Hence the
aliases frankfurter, wiener and hotdog. The elongated, sliced hotdog bun evolved
about the turn of the century from the bread and rolls with which street vendors
had long wrapped the heated little sausages.

   Harsh blow

   Q Why was Iniki, which caused so much damage in Hawaii, called a hurricane
rather than a typhoon?

   A "The systems are called typhoons west of the international dateline in the
western North Pacific, and east of that line they are called hurricanes," said
meteorologist Jack Beven at the U.S. National Hurricane Centre in Coral Gables,
Fla.

   Typhoon is an east Asian word for violent tropical cyclones and hurricane is
the North American term for them.

   Quick Q and A

   What does ISBN stand for as an acronym in books?

   International Standard Book Number, an official designation for cataloguing .

   24-hour line

   Call 868-3900 to record your questions and comments for You Asked Us. That's
also the automated line to answer our Yes or No question.

   Yes or No

   Should gene therapy be used to improve the intelligence and physical
appearance of children of the future?

   Dial 868-3900 with your yes or no by 10 a.m. tomorrow. Results on Tuesday.

   Texas tycoon

   Tuesday's question was: As a neighbor, would you like to see Texas
billionaire Ross Perot become president of the U.S.?

   Yes 52% No 48% (408 calls)

   His ability to create billions would make him an excellent manager of its
national affairs.

   No. Ross Perot doesn't know the first thing about democracy. This is apparent
when his views are questioned.

   Why not? They've had a peanut farmer, a B-movie actor, the head of the CIA.
Let's try a billionaire for a change.

   I'm thinking he can't be trusted and is making a fool of the American people.

   When you have mildew and dry rot in your home, you open the doors and windows
to let fresh air in. Yes, I'd vote for Perot. He might clean up the mess, and it
smells bad.

   He has been so indecisive on whether to run for the presidency of the U.S.
that he would hardly be the best candidate for such an important and powerful
position, which requires one to take forceful and decisive action on national
and international issues.

   He would shake up the U.S. a little and hopefully rub off on Canada, with our
high deficits.

   No. He's a megalomaniac with fascist leanings.

   Calendar

   Civil law replaces military rule in Canada on this date in 1764; Austria
issues world's first postcards, 1869; first baseball "World's Series" opens,
sponsored by New York World newspaper, 1903; Henry Ford introduces his Model T
auto, selling at $850, 1908, People's Republic of China proclaimed, 1949;
Mikhail Gorbachev becomes Soviet president, 1988.

   Compiled by Walter Stefaniuk

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 1999


                              195 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1992 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                   September 29, 1992, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A5

LENGTH: 453 words

HEADLINE: Support for gene therapy 'disturbing' critic says

BYLINE: BY DAN HURLEY SPECIAL TO THE STAR

BODY:


    A sizable minority of Americans supports using gene therapy to "improve" the
intelligence or physical characteristics that otherwise healthy children would
inherit, a nationwide poll has found.

   Forty-three per cent said they approved of using gene therapy to improve a
child's physical characteristics, while 42 per cent would approve using the
technique to improve a child's intelligence.

   The telephone survey of 1,000 adults, conducted by Louis Harris and
Associates, was commissioned by the March of Dimes Birth Defects Foundation to
stimulate debate on the social and ethical issues surrounding what many believe
will soon become a potent tool in medicine.

   "The March of Dimes opposes the use of gene therapy for non- therapeutic
uses," said Michael Katz, vice-president for research of the March of Dimes, in
a prepared statement. "We are not in the business of making healthy people
'better' or 'perfect.' We are in the business of making people with diseases
healthy."

   Jeremy Rifkin, an advocate in Washington, D.C., who has written and spoken
for years against the use of genetic alteration of plants, animals and humans,
said, "I am very disturbed that 42 per cent of the public would be in favor of
what potentially is eugenics. It's outrageous - it's like Germany in the 1930s."

   The survey found widespread general acceptance of gene therapy and genetic
testing. On the most basic question of whether Americans support the use of gene
therapy in principle to treat a genetic illness, nearly nine out of 10 - 89 per
cent - said they do.

   Some 79 per cent said they would undergo gene therapy themselves to correct a
serious or fatal genetic disease, 88 per cent would be willing to have their
children undergo gene therapy, and 79 per cent would take genetic tests before
having a child to learn if their future offspring was carrying genes for a fatal
genetic disease.

   But many Americans have little understanding of what it is they say they
support, the poll found. Over two-thirds, or 68 per cent, said they know
"relatively little" or "almost nothing" about genetic testing. And 87 per cent
said they know "relatively little" or "almost nothing" about gene therapy.

   Gene therapy is an experimental procedure to treat genetic disease by
restoring or replacing a missing or faulty gene in an individual.

   Genetic testing involves testing the genes of a person to see if they have a
known defect associated with an illness.

   The poll also found that a majority of Americans support using genetic
testing in ways that could invade privacy.

   Some 57 per cent said they believe the results of genetic tests need not be
kept completely confidential.

   MEDICAL TRIBUNE NEWS SERVICE


LOAD-DATE: September 30, 1992


                              196 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1992 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                        September 29, 1992, Tuesday, AM

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A5

LENGTH: 459 words

HEADLINE: Support for gene therapy 'disturbing' critic says

BYLINE: By Dan Hurley Special to The Star

BODY:

   A sizable minority of Americans supports using gene therapy to "improve" the
intelligence or physical characteristics that otherwise healthy children would
inherit, a nationwide poll has found.

   Forty-three per cent said they approved of using gene therapy to improve a
child's physical characteristics, while 42 per cent would approve using the
technique to improve a child's intelligence.

   The telephone survey of 1,000 adults, conducted by Louis Harris and
Associates, was commissioned by the March of Dimes Birth Defects Foundation to
stimulate debate on the social and ethical issues surrounding what many believe
will soon become a potent tool in medicine.

   "The March of Dimes opposes the use of gene therapy for non-therapeutic
uses," said Michael Katz, vice-president for research of the March of Dimes, in
a prepared statement. "We are not in the business of making healthy people
'better' or 'perfect.' We are in the business of making people with diseases
healthy."

   Jeremy Rifkin, an advocate in Washington, D.C., who has written and spoken
for years against the use of genetic alteration of plants, animals and humans,
said, "I am very disturbed that 42 per cent of the public would be in favor of
what potentially is eugenics. It's outrageous - it's like Germany in the 1930s."

   The survey found widespread general acceptance of gene therapy and genetic
testing. On the most basic question of whether Americans support the use of gene
therapy in principle to treat a genetic illness, nearly nine out of 10 - 89 per
cent - said they do.

   Some 79 per cent said they would undergo gene therapy themselves to correct a
serious or fatal genetic disease, 88 per cent would be willing to have their
children undergo gene therapy, and 79 per cent would take genetic tests before
having a child to learn if their future offspring was carrying genes for a fatal
genetic disease.

   But many Americans have little understanding of what it is they say they
support, the poll found. Over two-thirds, or 68 per cent, said they know
"relatively little" or "almost nothing" about genetic testing. And 87 per cent
said they know "relatively little" or "almost nothing" about gene therapy.

   Gene therapy is an experimental procedure to treat genetic disease by
restoring or replacing a missing or faulty gene in an individual.

   Genetic testing involves testing the genes of a person to see if they have a
known defect associated with an illness.

   The poll also found that a majority of Americans support using genetic
testing in ways that could invade privacy.

   Some 57 per cent said they believe the results of genetic tests need not be
kept completely confidential.

   MEDICAL TRIBUNE NEWS SERVICEUnited; States; poll; genetics

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 1999


                              197 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1992 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                     June 11, 1992, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A2

LENGTH: 595 words

HEADLINE: Injection of gene may fight skin cancer

BYLINE: BY THOMAS MAUGH LOS ANGELES TIMES

BODY:


    For the first time, physicians have directly inserted a gene into humans in
an attempt to cure a deadly disease.

   University of Michigan researchers announced they had injected the gene,
encased in small globules of fat, directly into the tumor of a 67-year-old woman
with metastatic melanoma, the most deadly form of skin cancer, in hopes the
added gene would stimulate the immune system to attack tumor cells. Though the
researchers hope the condition of the woman, the first of 12 patients to be
treated, will improve, the procedure is now being tested primarily for safety.

   Previous attempts at gene therapy have involved modification of cells removed
from the body followed by reinjection, a procedure some believe to be safer. But
many researchers believe the future of gene therapy lies in "direct injection"
techniques.

   If such techniques are effective, "they would provide a much simpler and less
costly alternative" to modifying cells outside the body, said geneticist A.
Dusty Miller of the Fred Hutchison Cancer Center in Seattle.

   Only when direct-injection techniques are perfected, added molecular
biologist W. French Anderson of the National Cancer Institute, will gene therapy
"have a major impact on the health care of our population."

   A second group at the University of Michigan also announced Tuesday it had
began gene therapy for an inherited form of high cholesterol that sharply
increases the risk of heart disease. The effort, in which liver cells were
modified outside the body and then reinjected into a 29-year-old Canadian woman,
marks only the second time in the U.S. that a disease other than cancer has been
treated with gene therapy.

   "We have begun to use DNA as a drug," said Michigan molecular geneticist Gary
J. Nabel, who conceived the melanoma treatment. DNA, or deoxyribonucleic acid,
is the genetic blueprint of life.

   Nabel's approach to cancer treatment is to "mimic the process of organ
rejection that occurs in transplants," he said. In transplant rejection, the
body targets proteins, called transplantation antigens, on the surface of cells
in the new organ, causing the immune system to attack it.

   Most cancer cells do not bear such antigens on their surface, but Nabel has
developed a unique way to put them there. Of the 13 human trials of gene therapy
now in progress worldwide, his is the only one that does not use a virus to
insert the added gene into cells.

   Rather, Nabel and his colleagues take the gene for a transplantation antigen
called HLA-B7 and encapsulate t in fat particles called liposomes. When the
liposomes are injected into the tumor, they bind to the surface membranes of the
tumor cells and carry the HLA-B7 genes into the interior of the cells.

   Genetic machinery within the cells produces the antigens, which migrate back
to the cellular membrane, where they are recognized and attacked by the body's
immune system. In the process of attacking these cells, Nabel said, "the body
also learns to recognize tumor cells that haven't been modified" and attacks
them as well.

   Nabel and his colleagues will treat 12 patients in their trial of the
technique. Like the first woman, whose identity is being kept confidential, all
have metstatic melanoma, which kills 6,700 Americans each year.

   Although the technique could be used for other types of cancer as well,
melanoma was chosen because the skin tumors are readily accessible and no
invasive medical procedures are necessary.

   Those selected to participate in the trial have a life expectancy of less
than one year.


LOAD-DATE: September 3, 1992


                              198 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1992 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                          June 11, 1992, Thursday, AM

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A2

LENGTH: 603 words

HEADLINE: Injection of gene may fight skin cancer

BYLINE: By Thomas Maugh LOS ANGELES TIMES

BODY:

   For the first time, physicians have directly inserted a gene into humans in
an attempt to cure a deadly disease.

   University of Michigan researchers announced they had injected the gene,
encased in small globules of fat, directly into the tumor of a 67-year-old woman
with metastatic melanoma, the most deadly form of skin cancer, in hopes the
added gene would stimulate the immune system to attack tumor cells. Though the
researchers hope the condition of the woman, the first of 12 patients to be
treated, will improve, the procedure is now being tested primarily for safety.

   Previous attempts at gene therapy have involved modification of cells removed
from the body followed by reinjection, a procedure some believe to be safer. But
many researchers believe the future of gene therapy lies in "direct injection"
techniques.

   If such techniques are effective, "they would provide a much simpler and less
costly alternative" to modifying cells outside the body, said geneticist A.
Dusty Miller of the Fred Hutchison Cancer Center in Seattle.

   Only when direct-injection techniques are perfected, added molecular
biologist W. French Anderson of the National Cancer Institute, will gene therapy
"have a major impact on the health care of our population."

   A second group at the University of Michigan also announced Tuesday it had
began gene therapy for an inherited form of high cholesterol that sharply
increases the risk of heart disease. The effort, in which liver cells were
modified outside the body and then reinjected into a 29-year-old Canadian woman,
marks only the second time in the U.S. that a disease other than cancer has been
treated with gene therapy.

   "We have begun to use DNA as a drug," said Michigan molecular geneticist Gary
J. Nabel, who conceived the melanoma treatment. DNA, or deoxyribonucleic acid,
is the genetic blueprint of life.

   Nabel's approach to cancer treatment is to "mimic the process of organ
rejection that occurs in transplants," he said. In transplant rejection, the
body targets proteins, called transplantation antigens, on the surface of cells
in the new organ, causing the immune system to attack it.

   Most cancer cells do not bear such antigens on their surface, but Nabel has
developed a unique way to put them there. Of the 13 human trials of gene therapy
now in progress worldwide, his is the only one that does not use a virus to
insert the added gene into cells.

   Rather, Nabel and his colleagues take the gene for a transplantation antigen
called HLA-B7 and encapsulate t in fat particles called liposomes. When the
liposomes are injected into the tumor, they bind to the surface membranes of the
tumor cells and carry the HLA-B7 genes into the interior of the cells.

   Genetic machinery within the cells produces the antigens, which migrate back
to the cellular membrane, where they are recognized and attacked by the body's
immune system. In the process of attacking these cells, Nabel said, "the body
also learns to recognize tumor cells that haven't been modified" and attacks
them as well.

   Nabel and his colleagues will treat 12 patients in their trial of the
technique. Like the first woman, whose identity is being kept confidential, all
have metstatic melanoma, which kills 6,700 Americans each year.

   Although the technique could be used for other types of cancer as well,
melanoma was chosen because the skin tumors are readily accessible and no
invasive medical procedures are necessary.

   Those selected to participate in the trial have a life expectancy of less
than one year.United; States; cancer; genetics; research

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 1999


                              199 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1992 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                    April 30, 1992, Thursday, METRO EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A6

LENGTH: 441 words

HEADLINE: Dead boy's cells advance anemia research Breakthrough may aid other
children, MD says

BYLINE: BY MARILYN DUNLOP TORONTO STAR

BODY:


    The legacy of a 7-year-old Brampton boy who died of a rare anemia has led to
an important genetic discovery that may one day save the lives of other children
with the disease.

   Danny MacLellan died 16 months ago of Fanconi's anemia, but some of his cells
live on in a research laboratory at the Hospital for Sick Children.

   And from the cells, a team of scientists has identified the gene that causes
one form of the anemia that killed Danny.

   Dr. Manuel Buchwald, professor of molecular and medical genetics at the
University of Toronto, and researcher Craig Strathdee report their finding in
today's issue of the British scientific journal Nature.

   In a few years the discovery may lead to gene therapy for children with
Fanconi's anemia, Buchwald said.

   Danny died in December, 1990, despite a bone marrow transplant performed in
France. The anemia he inherited destroys the ability of bone marrow to make
blood cells. His older brother John had died of the same inherited disease a
year earlier.

   Danny's cells proved invaluable, Buchwald said in an interview, because they
were the most sensitive to drugs among cell samples from the small number of
patients treated at the hospital for the anemia.

   The new method involved mixing Danny's cells in a "soup" of genetic material
that contained many copies of normal human genes, Buchwald said. There are an
estimated 100,000 human genes and Buchwald said the mixture was like "a soup
with 100,000 noodles."

   Each of the boy's cells randomly absorbed about 50 genes. The scientists
correctly assumed that any cell lucky enough to pick up a healthy copy of the
anemia gene would have its defect corrected.

   They knew that cells with the gene defect were destroyed by certain drugs and
those that picked up a good copy of the gene would survive. The drugs don't kill
normal cells.

   When the scientists added a drug to the cells, some survived.

   One of the genes they had picked up in the soup had saved them.

   The scientists compared the 50 newly acquired genes in all the surviving
cells to find a common one.

   They put the corrected version of the anemia gene into cells obtained from
four other Fanconi patients and tested them with the drug.

   If the four patients' cells were not destroyed by the drug, it would prove
the common gene they had identified using Danny's cells was a Fanconi's anemia
gene. In short, they had given the anemia cells the right gene to correct the
defect.

   The cells of two patients with the same type of Fanconi's anemia as Danny
were found to no longer be sensitive to the drug. Cells from the two other
patients were still destroyed.


GRAPHIC: photo: Danny McClellan

LOAD-DATE: May 1, 1992


                              200 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1992 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                          April 30, 1992, Thursday, AM

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A6

LENGTH: 441 words

HEADLINE: Dead boy's cells advance anemia research Breakthrough may aid other
children, MD says

BYLINE: By Marilyn Dunlop Toronto Star

BODY:

   The legacy of a 7-year-old Brampton boy who died of a rare anemia has led to
an important genetic discovery that may one day save the lives of other children
with the disease.

   Danny MacLellan died 16 months ago of Fanconi's anemia, but some of his cells
live on in a research laboratory at the Hospital for Sick Children.

   And from the cells, a team of scientists has identified the gene that causes
one form of the anemia that killed Danny.

   Dr. Manuel Buchwald, professor of molecular and medical genetics at the
University of Toronto, and researcher Craig Strathdee report their finding in
today's issue of the British scientific journal Nature.

   In a few years the discovery may lead to gene therapy for children with
Fanconi's anemia, Buchwald said.

   Danny died in December, 1990, despite a bone marrow transplant performed in
France. The anemia he inherited destroys the ability of bone marrow to make
blood cells. His older brother John had died of the same inherited disease a
year earlier.

   Danny's cells proved invaluable, Buchwald said in an interview, because they
were the most sensitive to drugs among cell samples from the small number of
patients treated at the hospital for the anemia.

   The new method involved mixing Danny's cells in a "soup" of genetic material
that contained many copies of normal human genes, Buchwald said. There are an
estimated 100,000 human genes and Buchwald said the mixture was like "a soup
with 100,000 noodles."

   Each of the boy's cells randomly absorbed about 50 genes. The scientists
correctly assumed that any cell lucky enough to pick up a healthy copy of the
anemia gene would have its defect corrected.

   They knew that cells with the gene defect were destroyed by certain drugs and
those that picked up a good copy of the gene would survive. The drugs don't kill
normal cells.

   When the scientists added a drug to the cells, some survived.

   One of the genes they had picked up in the soup had saved them.

   The scientists compared the 50 newly acquired genes in all the surviving
cells to find a common one.

   They put the corrected version of the anemia gene into cells obtained from
four other Fanconi patients and tested them with the drug.

   If the four patients' cells were not destroyed by the drug, it would prove
the common gene they had identified using Danny's cells was a Fanconi's anemia
gene. In short, they had given the anemia cells the right gene to correct the
defect.

   The cells of two patients with the same type of Fanconi's anemia as Danny
were found to no longer be sensitive to the drug. Cells from the two other
patients were still destroyed.

GRAPHIC: photo: Danny McClellanToronto; genetics; research

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 1999
