
                               1 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                 Copyright 2010 Toronto Star Newspapers Limited
                                The Toronto Star

                           December 23, 2010 Thursday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A10

LENGTH: 689 words

HEADLINE: Provinces gain oversight of fertility treatment, research;
Ontario must write its own laws after top court rules part of federal
reproduction act goes too far

DATELINE: OTTAWA

BODY:

   OTTAWA-It will now be up to Ontario to draw up a whole new legislative scheme
to regulate fertility treatments and embryonic research after the country's top
court declared it a provincial, not a federal, responsibility.

   In a landmark advisory opinion, a deeply divided Supreme Court of Canada
ruled major sections of the federal law on assisted human reproduction fall
outside Ottawa's power to regulate under criminal law.

   The court said it is up to provinces to control the licensing of doctors and
clinics and to regulate how they deal with donors and would-be parents, or with
eggs, sperm and embryos for research purposes, including developing new genetic
therapies for disease.

   The result is a significant victory for Quebec, which has passed extensive
regulations and - backed by New Brunswick, Saskatchewan and Alberta - challenged
Ottawa.

   For Ontario, which has not enacted its own regime, it represents a
legislative challenge to draft provisions to protect the interests of donors,
aspiring parents, and offspring that result from in vitro treatments.

   The province is analyzing and reviewing the Supreme Court ruling to
understand the implications for Ontario, said Neala Barton, press secretary for
Health Minister Deb Matthews.

   "The government's number one concern is patient safety and we're going to
continue to work with the College of Physicians and Surgeons of Ontario to
ensure that anyone seeking fertility treatment is going to get the safest
possible care," she said.

   Barton stressed that Wednesday's decision "doesn't change a couple's ability
to access fertility services as they currently exist in Ontario."

   In the ruling, which split three ways - 4-4-1 - a slim majority sided with
Quebec. Even judges who agreed on the result and formed a majority could not
agree on why. It took 20 months to formulate three sets of reasons that run 147
pages.

   The ruling was welcomed by fertility clinicians, but criticized by one
evangelical group that fears a "checkerboard" approach across the country will
lead to "unhealthy" embryonic experimentation.

   Certain federal criminal bans still stand. It is still illegal to pay for
surrogacy, and the federal government may limit reimbursements to donors and
surrogates for expenses only, although Ottawa has never defined an allowable
expense.

   Ottawa may still legislate mandatory written consent of donors; a ban on
extracting eggs or sperm from persons under 18 except to preserve their
fertility; and a prohibition on "chimera" or human-animal hybrids.

   Those practices, a majority of judges agreed, are rightly up to the federal
government to control with criminal laws, under its power to protect morality,
public health and security in Canada.

   The net result is the federal agency created in 2004 to oversee assisted
human reproductive technologies continues to exist, but in practice has only a
small area of responsibility. It may collect information and make some data
public, and enforce any federal guideline on reimbursing donors or surrogates
for expenses.

   Dr. Perry Phillips, a director of IVF Canada, a Toronto fertility clinic,
welcomed the ruling's recognition that the practice of fertility medicine is a
health issue, and may vary by province. Standards are already set by
professional colleges and associations, and it never should have been legislated
as a criminal matter, he said.

   "It was a badly written law to begin with," Phillips said.

   But lawyer Don Hutchinson of the Evangelical Fellowship of Canada said he has
"grave concern that we're going to start to see manipulations (of embryos)
taking place that are unhealthy" in provinces where there are no clear rules.

   Without a uniform national regulatory regime, he said, "it can become very
competitive to see who's going to get the business and draw the dollars into
their province - who's prepared to go furthest with pushing the envelope on
experimentation in this area."

   Phillips dismissed such fears, saying it may only produce "medical tourism"
where desperate couples seek treatments out-of-province. "Most clinics in Canada
are practical treat-the-patient clinics ...We're not going to create Minotaurs."

LOAD-DATE: December 23, 2010


                               2 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                 Copyright 2010 Toronto Star Newspapers Limited
                                The Toronto Star

                            November 26, 2010 Friday

SECTION: LIVING; Pg. L1

LENGTH: 628 words

HEADLINE: Jacob's Ladder reaches for hope;
Toronto's Schwartz family has raised $2 million to fight son's disease, create
screening program

BODY:

   Ellen and Jeff Schwartz knew something was terribly wrong.

   Their infant son, Jacob, wasn't progressing, he didn't follow his mother with
his eyes and he seemed "floppy" in his parents' arms.

   At age four months, the Toronto couple learned he had Canavan's Disease, a
rare neurodegenerative condition, and he wasn't expected to live past the age of
four.

   "That was a tough thing to process," says Jeff, 46, a credit executive. "We
needed time alone."

   But the pause was short-lived. When the couple was asked shortly after that
to participate in a gene therapy study at Yale University in Connecticut, they
turned their energies to research and education.

   The Toronto couple founded Jacob's Ladder, a non-profit agency that has
raised $2 million in the 13 years since Jacob's original diagnosis. One of its
major successes has been helping to establish an Ontario screening program for
seven neurogenerative diseases for at-risk couples, especially those of
Askhenazi Jewish descent.

   Ellen, 43, an elementary school teacher, was able to use the screening
programs in later pregnancies and has two other children with Jeff - Ben, 7, and
Beverly, 11 - who do not have the inherited disease.

   When she was pregnant with Jacob, the only screening test available was for
Tay-Sachs Disease, but now tests are available for Canavan's Disease, Bloom
Syndrome, Fanconi Anemia Type C, Mucolipidosis Type 4, Dysautonomia and
Niemann-Pick Disease.

   Having a seriously ill child presents many challenges to a family, says Jeff,
including fatigue after taking turns being "on call" all night in case Jacob has
trouble breathing. When Jacob coughs, his head must be repositioned to clear the
airway, Jeff explains. Jacob uses a wheelchair, does not speak and is fed
through a gastronomy tube. In spite of the early gloomy prognosis, Jacob
recently celebrated his 13th birthday and his Bar Mitzvah.

   "If it takes other people five minutes to get out the door, we allot 45
minutes. That's our life. That's part of the fun of it," says Jeff.

   In spite of the stress of jobs, family and caring for Jacob, the Schwartzes
have taken on fundraising and education programs, Jeff says, because "sharing
our stories gives us strength."

   The experience is also teaching their two younger children important lessons
about empathy and responsibility, says Ellen, who says they bring Jacob's
wheelchair without being asked and help him when he has trouble breathing.

   Ellen felt overwhelmed planning the latest fundraiser, Jake's Gigantic Give,
on Nov. 27 and 28, and exclaimed, "I don't know how much longer I can do this."

   A little while later, Beverly handed her a letter saying, "I think you and
dad are heroes. Please continue."

   Beverly, who wrote and performed a song for Jacob at his Bar Mitzvah, says,
"Just because it's difficult doesn't mean you can stop."

   She has learned to help out, she says. "I will read him a book. Sometimes I
play guitar for him and it puts a smile on his face."

   Ben, who has helped on fundraising campaigns by asking Yonge St. store owners
to display posters and flyers, says, "I can hold his hand. Sometimes I can sing
to him."

   The fundraising activities are usually fun family events such as carnivals,
says Ellen, including Jake's Gigantic Give, which involves wrapping and donating
toys to children's organizations.

   The family receives home help for Jacob from 4 p.m. to 8 p.m. daily, when the
younger children participate in swimming and hockey.

   Ellen, who wrote a book, Lessons from Jacob, says, "We still have to have a
normal life. We need to car pool and go out for dinner like other families."

   In the meantime, "We take it one day at a time," she says, adding that as
long as Jacob is breathing well and enjoying his day, their goals have been met.

   For more information: jacobsladder.ca

GRAPHIC:  Ellen and Jeff Schwartz with kids Beverly, Jacob (middle) and Ben.
They have taken on fundraising and education programs, Jeff says, because
"sharing our stories gives us strength." Colin McConnell/Toronto Star

LOAD-DATE: November 26, 2010


                               6 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                 Copyright 2010 Toronto Star Newspapers Limited
                                The Toronto Star

                             October 1, 2010 Friday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A3

LENGTH: 721 words

HEADLINE: Stem cells made easy, eh?;
`Toronto-born scientist creates cells that defy rejection, disease

BODY:

   Nothing Derrick Rossi ever does surprises his mother Agnes.

   "When he was in his early 20s he adored butterflies ... and so he went off to
Africa and collected butterflies," she says.

   "When Derrick puts his mind to something, Derrick does it."

   Now the Toronto-born, Harvard University researcher may have devised the best
method yet to create personalized stem cells - cells that could eventually lead
to the creation of transplant organs, like hearts and lungs, that would carry no
risk of rejection.

   In a transformative study released Thursday, the 45-year-old biologist
presents a new method to create embryonic stem cells from adult skin cells.

   Indeed, in one fell swoop, the former Agincourt kid has surmounted the four
major hurdles that have plagued the creation and usefulness of such cells since
the ability to make them was announced to the world five years ago.

   "All scientists that hear this story get excited about (it)," Rossi says.

   "Now we have an experimental (method) for generating patient specific (stem)
cells, highly efficiently and safely, and also taking those cells towards
clinically useful cell types," he said in a teleconference interview.

   The study is being published in the journal Cell Stem Cell.

   Formed just after conception, embryonic stem cells are the building blocks of
every organ and tissue in our bodies.

   In a seminal 2006 study, Japanese scientist Shinya Yamanaka rocked the
medical world by showing that adult cells could be converted back into an
embryonic state by introducing four so-called "transcription factors" into their
genomes.

   The creation of stem cells from adult tissues ushered in the hope of
personalized organ transplantation and other genetic therapies. Because the
transplant tissues would be grown from a patient's own cells, there would be no
rejection.

   The Yamanaka stem cells would also alleviate ethical issues surrounding the
use of actual embryonic cells, which require the termination of a life at its
earliest stages.

   Soon after the Japanese study was released, however, four major problems with
the method became apparent, Rossi says.

   First, it quickly proved inefficient at generating stem cells, producing
fewer than one for every 10,000 adult cells treated.

   Second, the technique employed a virus to transport the transcription factors
into the genome. This virus physically inserted itself right into the adult
cell's DNA, where it often activated cancer-causing genes.

   Third, the stem cells created by the Yamanaka procedure frequently bore
significant functional differences to the true embryonic versions.

   Finally, cells created by the method very often could not be coaxed to grow
into desired tissues.

   "When we set about this project we didn't actually intend to tackle all these
issues," says Rossi, who took his undergraduate and master's degrees at the
University of Toronto. His primary goal, he says, was to create stem cells that
did not carry cancer risks.

   To do this, Rossi managed to manipulate the mRNA (which normally carries
instructions from DNA-based genes to cellular construction) to carry
instructions - Yamanaka's transcription factors - back into the DNA.

   "RNA obviously doesn't integrate into the DNA genome of the host cell," he
says.

   "We actually found that we could very efficiently reprogram these (adult)
cells within the course of a couple of weeks to an (embryonic) state."

   Having surmounted the cancer concerns, however, Rossi's team found that they
had actually made better embryonic stem cells, and produced them 40 to 100 times
more readily.

   "When we did a molecular comparison to human embryonic stem cells we found
they very, very closely (resembled) the molecular properties of human embryonic
stem cells," Rossi says.

   "Much more so actually than virally ... derived (embryonic) cells."

   Finally, Rossi's team effectively coaxed them to grow into desired tissues.
In the study, Rossi used genes that encouraged his embryonic cells to grow
readily into muscle tissue.

   This, says Canadian Institutes of Health Research scientist Mick Bhatia, may
be the most important aspect of the Rossi study.

   " ... once you get these (embryonic) cells, how do you (change) them into
cell types we really want to use," says Bhatia, a top McMaster University stem
cell expert. "That part of the paper, in my personal view, is really what makes
it unique and novel."

GRAPHIC:  "All scientists that hear this story get excited about (it)," says
Harvard Prof. Derrick Rossi of his stem cell study. Harvard University

LOAD-DATE: October 1, 2010


                               7 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                 Copyright 2010 Toronto Star Newspapers Limited
                                The Toronto Star

                          September 23, 2010 Thursday

SECTION: FEATURE; Pg. M2

LENGTH: 634 words

HEADLINE: Targetting treatment so it's increasingly focussed;
Tailored approach leads to better results

BODY:

   Chemotherapy is never a pleasant experience for someone battling cancer.

   Sometimes the side-effects are so bad, the treatment may seem worse than the
disease. Especially when the treatment proves ineffective.

   Until recently, the only way doctors could tell if chemo would work or not
was to try it.

   Now, this hit-and-miss routine is beginning to give way to personalized
medicine.

   "In simplistic terms, rather than treating the disease, you're treating the
patient," says Dr. Malcolm Moore, head physician at Princess Margaret Hospital.
"It's not gene therapy, 'though gene-profiling is a component. And there's still
a lot we don't know.

   "But this is the future. This is the way it's going to be."

   Moore is head of medical oncology and hematology at PMH, and director of the
hospital's new drug development program.

   "We've recognized for a long time that, if we use a uniform approach in
treating cancer patients, some patients do well, some don't do well and some
experience a lot of toxicity from chemotherapy drugs.

   "Personalized medicine is trying to understand that, so you can make those
decisions in advance of treatment, before you see toxicity, or that the
treatment isn't working.

   "So understanding the genetics of the patient and the tumor is really
critical."

   A pinpoint approach has other advantages. Says Moore, "You can tell a
patient, 'You know what, for you, this drug will not work. So why go through the
time, expense and toxicity?' "

   Lung-cancer researchers at Princess Margaret recently identified a "genetic
signature," giving doctors and their patients "a clearer map of the appropriate
post-operative treatment to follow," says Dr. Ming Tsao, who led the study.

   The discovery will help identify patients with a high risk of their cancer
recurring, who may benefit from chemotherapy after surgery.

   Using a more complicated series of genetic tests, says Moore, doctors will be
able to tell a patient who's had an operation, " 'The likelihood of the cancer
returning is extremely small, you don't need chemo.' "

   Adds Tsao, "Not all patients benefit from chemotherapy after surgery and . .
. may be spared from the potentially debilitating side-effects of this
treatment."

   His team identified a set of 15 genes that predicted which patients, among a
group that did not receive chemotherapy after surgery, had aggressive cancers
with a high risk of recurrence and death, and those with less-aggressive cancers
and a low risk of recurrence.

   The findings were applied to patients who did receive chemo. Patients
predicted to have aggressive cancers derived the most benefit from chemo, with a
67-per-cent reduction in the risk of death. Chemo did not reduce the risk of
death in "low-risk" patients.

   One type of drug used against cancer is an EGFR inhibitor - "EGFR is a
stimulus, so if you block that stimulus, you shrink that tumor," Moore says.

   After a series of patients were treated with these drugs, some responding
well and others not, researchers looked at the genetic profile of the tumors
"and were able to tease out one or two key factors," he says.

   Moore believes that within the next two decades, genetic analysis will be a
major part of cancer care.

   "There's a whole spectrum of things happening," he says. "Part of the advance
is the technology exists to look at a lot of different genes in rapid fashion.

   "We used to look at one specific thing, one receptor . . . very
uni-dimensional. We can now look at the expression of a lot of different genes
quite quickly.

   "Twenty years ago, when we introduced a new cancer treatment, we generally
didn't know why it worked.

   "If you don't completely understand how a drug works, you can't predict the
effects.

   "Now, with a high level of knowledge of how they work, we can say with far
greater assurance, 'We would expect this drug to work on this patient.' "

LOAD-DATE: September 23, 2010


                              14 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2010 Sun Media Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved
                          London Free Press (Ontario)

                             March 26, 2010 Friday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. B3

LENGTH: 421 words

HEADLINE: Afghan attack deaths return to haunt Merkel;
POLITICS: Leader knew of civilian casualties earlier than admitted, magazine
reports

BYLINE: BY QMI AGENCY

DATELINE: BERLIN

BODY:

   German Chancellor Angela Merkel's office knew about civilian deaths caused by
a 2009 air strike in Afghanistan sooner than it first admitted, a magazine has
reported, potentially embarrassing her ahead of a crucial vote.

   Merkel's defence minister at the time, Franz Josef Jung, initially said he
was not aware of any civilian casualties and later lost his cabinet post over
the attack. The head of the German armed forces was also forced out in the
aftermath.

   Thursday's report in the online version of weekly magazine Der Spiegel said
Germany's BND foreign intelligence agency told the chancellery the morning after
the strike on two fuel tankers that between 50 and 100 civilians had likely
died.

   Neither the BND nor the chancellery could immediately be reached for comment
on the report.

   Most Germans want Merkel to pull out of Afghanistan and the attack created a
wave of negative publicity for her government.

   Voters may respond negatively to the report when they go to the polls on May
9 to elect a new government in Germany's most populous state, North
Rhine-Westphalia.

   Merkel's centre-right coalition will lose control of the Bundesrat upper
house of parliament if it fails to defend its majority in the western state.

   The Sept. 4 strike carried out by U.S. forces at Germany's behest sparked a
parliamentary investigation that is still creating headaches for Merkel's
government.

   The Afghan government said more than 100 people died in the strike, among
them 30 civilians and a number of unidentified persons.

   Merkel, who may be grilled by the parliamentary probe, did not comment
publicly on the attack until three days later, when she firmly rejected
international criticism of it.

   Without specifically mentioning the death of non-combatants in the strike,
Merkel said at the time she regretted the loss of any innocent civilian lives in
Afghanistan.

   HEALTH: Nanoparticles target cancerous cells, researchers say

   Tiny robots deliver gene therapy through blood

   Is this the beginning of the end of cancer? A California Institute of
Technology-led team of researchers has published the first proof that a targeted
nanoparticle can traffic into tumours and turn off an important cancer gene.

   A photo released by the institute, to be published in an upcoming issue of
the journal Nature, shows tiny black dots that researchers say are
cancer-crushing micro-robots destroying a cancerous cell using a mechanism known
as RNA interference (RNAi).

   The nanobots are made of polymers and a protein that attaches to the
cancerous cell's surface.

GRAPHIC: photo by Shamil Zhumatov, Reuters Afghan men on a motorcycle ride past
a U.S. armoured vehicle on the outskirts of Kandahar on Thursday. The government
of Germany, which has soldiers in Afghanistan as part of an international
coalition, is facing public pressure to pull out of the country.

LOAD-DATE: March 26, 2010


                              16 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2010 Sun Media Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved
                          London Free Press (Ontario)

                            February 8, 2010 Monday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. B4

LENGTH: 585 words

HEADLINE: Risky gene therapy may tempt athletes

BYLINE: BY HELEN BRANSWELL, THE CP

DATELINE: TORONTO

BODY:

   Gene therapy, still considered high risk and experimental in medicine, will
likely be the new frontier for doping in sport, experts warned Thursday in a
scientific journal.

   There are already signs some in sports have explored its potential, they
said. But how common those efforts are is anyone's guess.

   "Authoritatively, I think the only honest answer to say is nobody knows,"
lead author Dr. Theodore Friedmann said.

   "But with the improvement in the gene therapy technology, the extension to
sport is becoming more and more inevitable."

   Gene doping is on the World Anti-Doping Agency's list of banned substances
and methods.

   Friedmann and two co-authors -- one of whom works for WADA -- sketch out the
problems posed by this possible new form of cheating in a review article in the
journal Science.

   They warn of Internet marketing campaigns aimed at enticing athletes to try
techniques that could endanger their lives.

   "It's not ready for prime time because the technology isn't there to allow
it," said Friedmann, who chairs WADA's gene doping expert group and is director
of the gene therapy program at the University of California, San Diego. "But we
know in sport that that doesn't always rule the day and people use preliminary
and incomplete science to do things. ... They take advantage of whatever
technology they can."

   Over the past couple of decades, science has made great strides in the field
of genetics.

   And scientists have pinpointed some disease-causing genes. But progress in
translating those findings into treatments and cures has been slow.

   The few gene therapy treatments that seem to work are still in the early
stages of their application. Often gene manipulation triggers unforeseen and
unwanted side-effects.

   For instance, gene therapy has been used to establish immune system function
in some children born with an auto-immune disease that left them virtually
defenceless. These are so-called "bubble children" -- forced to live out their
short lives enclosed in a sterile environment because they cannot fight off
germs.

   Friedmann said work done to reset their immune systems using gene therapy has
allowed treated children to come out of their protective enclosures. But several
of the children developed leukemia, triggered by the virus used to deliver the
reparative gene into their systems.

   In animal research on a gene therapy meant to stimulate production of red
blood cells, some of the monkeys used developed fatal anemia -- an end which was
directly opposite to what the therapy was meant to do.

   "The body doesn't like to be perturbed," Friedmann said. "And you push in one
place and other things will give in other places. Those other things may or may
not be innocuous."

   "In the context of (disease) therapy, you tolerate that in the cause of doing
good. But in the case of (healthy) young athletes, you can't tolerate doing harm
with these kinds of manipulations."

   But the authors fear the promises of athletic glory may prove too tempting
for some athletes. They note a German coach was discovered a few years ago
trying to obtain a gene delivery treatment that turns on the body's
erythropoietin production, used by dopers in endurance sports. It can be
detected in doping control, but if gene therapy allowed athletes to crank the
amount of red blood cells they make without taking a drug, it may also allow
them to foil anti-doping tests -- at least for a time.

   Friedmann said he believes science will be able to devise ways to detect gene
doping, but he acknowledges it will be hard.

LOAD-DATE: February 8, 2010


                              17 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2010 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                            February 5, 2010 Friday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A04

LENGTH: 720 words

HEADLINE: A new era of;
Athletes will soon turn to undetectable genetic manipulation, researchers warn

BYLINE: Joseph Hall, Toronto Star

BODY:

   doping?

   On the eve of the Vancouver Olympics, researchers are warning that athletes
are on the cusp of a new era in sports doping - one that will use undetectable
gene therapies to enhance performance.

   "We are convinced that this is the next frontier," says Mark Frankel,
director of the scientific freedom, responsibility and law program at the
American Association for the Advancement of Science.

   "With elite athletes, there is so much pressure to be successful that they
will grasp at almost anything," says Frankel, whose sentinel article appears
Friday in the journal Science.

   Genetic manipulation could improve muscle mass, oxygen-carrying capacity in
the blood, and metabolism, and run the gamut of Olympic sports, the authors
write.

   While the medical promise of gene therapies to heal human ailments has gone
largely unfulfilled to date, many are now being studied in test tubes and
animals.

   Yet, so determined are some athletes to find new and undetectable doping
advantages that they may turn to these experimental therapies before their human
safety and effectiveness have been proven, Frankel says.

   "All of us who were involved in putting this article together fear that
people will just jump on some of these things before they're ready," Frankel
says.

   He says researchers publishing articles on successful genetic manipulations
in mice have already received calls from coaches offering their charges up as
human guinea pigs.

   They would answer, 'No, no, no, you don't understand, this has just been
applied in mice, it has a ways to go before it can be applied to humans,'"
Frankel says.

   "And the coaches' response would be, 'Well, why don't we use our athletes as
part of that process?'"

   While there have been few human successes, Frankel says there is no doubt
gene therapies - manipulating or augmenting a patient's own cache of genes in
affected areas of the body - will soon become a major component of medicine. And
it is the methods that will be used to introduce new genes into our own DNA
stores that will be the focus of the athletes and trainers bent on cheating.

   "It's the methods of gene therapies that are the key here and not so much how
they've been applied to the medical arena," he says.

   A method used to insert new genes into the withered limbs of muscular
dystrophy patients, for example, could also be employed to introduce
bulk-building genes into healthy tissue. "And if you look on the web, you will
find companies that are actually making claims about their ability to alter your
genetic limitations," Frankel says.

   He says the timing of his paper's publication was meant to coincide with the
Vancouver Games, to draw more attention to the looming doping onslaught.

   But Dr. Andrew Pipe, Canada's anti-doping dean, says he is highly doubtful
that any athletes at these Winter Olympics will have used gene therapies as
performance enhancers. "I don't think it's right around the corner just yet,"
said Pipe, former chair of Canada's national anti-doping program, in commenting
on the article.

   "But do we need to be concerned in the future? Absolutely, and we need to be
vigilant in that respect."

   Pipe warns that there are a number of traditional doping strategies - such as
some blood enhancement methods - that still baffle those on the detection side
and that officials need to keep concentrating on these.

   But because gene doping will often involve a manipulation of an athlete's own
DNA, traditional detection methods like blood and urine analysis might well
prove ineffectual, Pipe says.

   Frankel says the Montreal-based World Anti-Doping Agency, or WADA, has
already invested substantial research funds into potential methods to detect DNA
cheats.

   Olivier Rabin, WADA's scientific director and article co-author, says the
organization has already designed broad detection strategies in anticipation of
the coming gene-doping revolution. Rabin says, for example, that viruses are
often used as vectors to insert genes into a cell nucleus, where they can begin
to work with the rest of a patient's DNA. Finding these viral vectors could be
one method of detecting cheats.

   As well, Rabin says, officials could demand that athletes submit themselves
to physiological and metabolic profiling. If their individual profiles change
too much over time, officials can infer there has been a doping infraction.

GRAPHIC:  Blood and urine analysis will likely be useless in detecting DNA
cheats. Genetic manipulation could improve muscle mass and metabolism,
researchers say.

LOAD-DATE: February 5, 2010


                              23 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2009 Sun Media Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved
                          London Free Press (Ontario)

                           November 14, 2009 Saturday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. B1

LENGTH: 421 words

HEADLINE: More eligible to take vaccine;
H1N1

BYLINE: BY CHRISTINA SPENCER, SUN MEDIA NATIONAL BUREAU

DATELINE: OTTAWA

BODY:

   Buffeted by criticism about shortages of H1N1 vaccine -- including in the
nation's capital -- federal health officials have widened access to the H1N1
shot by approving a Canadian-made product with no booster additive and expanding
the list of demographic groups who can receive it.

   Dr. David Butler-Jones, Canada's chief public health officer, said yesterday
he's recommending that the unadjuvanted vaccine manufactured by GlaxoSmithKline
in Ste-Foy, Que., be made available for healthy people aged 10 to 64. His
previous guideline called for that group to receive adjuvanted vaccine, i.e.
shots with a booster.

   The unadjuvanted GSK product had already been sent to provincial warehouses
in anticipation of federal approval, which came Thursday, according to Dr. Elwyn
Griffiths, director general of the biologics and genetic therapies directorate
at Health Canada.

   In total, Health Canada and the Public Health Agency of Canada had ordered
1.8 million doses of the unadjuvanted vaccine from GSK. It was bound primarily
for pregnant women, but before its approval, the feds also brought in 200,000
doses of unadjuvanted vaccine from Australia.

   Since there are only 300,000 to 350,000 pregnancies a year in Canada,
unadjuvanted shots can now be made available to a wider range of people with
healthy immune systems. Butler-Jones is still recommending that those with
compromised immune responses stick with the adjuvanted version.

   The seeming glut of unadjuvanted vaccine came with other good news:
Butler-Jones said the unadjuvanted vaccine confers immunity in 94% of those who
receive it, an effectiveness much higher than seasonal flu vaccines, which
normally give 60% to 80% protection. Adjuvanted vaccine has shown results in the
98% range.

   "This is actually a very pleasant finding and beneficial in terms of the
protection it offers," Butler-Jones said.

   GSK has distributed 8.5 million doses of vaccine to date, and a further 1.9
million doses are expected to be in the field next week. About 20% of the
Canadian population has been immunized.

   But this past week, they were still feeling shortages caused by an earlier
government decision to have GSK interrupt production of the adjuvanted vaccine
in order to make a supply of unadjuvanted product.

   The rollout of the now-approved unadjuvanted vaccine is expected to be swift,
because it has already been in storage across Canada.

   Dr. Perry Kendall, British Columbia's chief public health officer, said
"prepositioning" the vaccine in his province would save B.C. four days of delay.

GRAPHIC: photo DR. DAVID BUTLER-JONES

LOAD-DATE: November 14, 2009


                              27 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2009 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                           October 29, 2009 Thursday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. GT08

LENGTH: 638 words

HEADLINE: Therapy keeps lungs healthy, even after death;
Toronto researchers' technique for organs offers hope for those waiting for
transplants

BYLINE: Noor Javed, Toronto Star

BODY:

   A pair of lungs sits outside the human body in a bubble-like apparatus,
seemingly breathing on their own.

   The lungs move in and out as an oxygen- and protein-rich fluid is pumped into
the organ to keep it from deteriorating. This process does the job for up to 12
hours. After that, the race is on to get the donor organ into a recipient
because the tissue will start to deteriorate, the lung cavity will get flooded
and the tissue walls will begin to separate - making it unusable for
transplantation.

   But now, after 10 years of research, a team of Toronto scientists has
discovered a way to genetically modify the injured donor lungs, so that they
repair on their own any damage that happens once death occurs and before a
transplant takes place.

   The revolutionary gene therapy technique was described in the latest edition
of the journal Science Translational Medicine, which was published Wednesday.

   The technique could double the number and improve the quality of donor lungs
- and other donor organs - available for transplant and dramatically improve
health outcomes after transplantation

   "We are actually able to have the organ improve over time while it is outside
the body," said Dr. Shaf Keshavjee, senior scientist at the McEwen Centre for
Regenerative Medicine and director of the University Health Network's Lung
Transplant Program.

   Last year, Keshavjee and his team pioneered a technique dubbed the Toronto
XVIVO Perfusion System, which preserved lungs in a structure, pumped them with
an oxygen- and protein-rich solution and attached them to a respirator -
essentially mimicking the physiology of real lungs. The procedure increased the
"shelf life" of the lungs to nearly 12 hours from four, and set the stage for
the use of a sophisticated gene therapy technique.

   Researchers, all from hospitals in Toronto, found that lungs maintained on
the perfusion system alone were stable for up to 12 hours. But the lungs that
received the gene therapy, in addition to the perfusion, significantly improved
their functions, including the flow of oxygen and blood in the lungs. "For the
first time, we hope to improve the health of donor lungs that we could not have
used before by using gene therapy to decrease inflammation and repair cells
before transplantation," said Keshavjee.

   Worldwide, only 15 per cent of donor lungs are usable due to injuries
sustained by the organ during the death of the donor.

   The researchers used pig and human donor lungs by first placing them in the
perfusion system to warm them to normal body temperature.

   The lungs were then injected with the IL-10 gene, which prevents organ
degeneration and shuts off cells that cause the body to refuse transplanted
organs.

   They discovered that the lungs began to produce the new IL-10
anti-inflammatory proteins six hours after insertion, and began to decrease
inflammation in the lungs, repair the structure and prepare the organ for
potential rejection it will face post-transplantation.

   Scientists say that donor lungs that function better from the start will lead
to more predictable and safer outcomes, shorter periods of mechanical
ventilation and shorter periods of post-operative care.

   Toronto has been at the forefront of lung transplantations for decades. In
1983, Toronto researchers were the first in the world to complete a successful
lung transplant. A few years later, they did the world's first double-lung
transplant.

   But their latest research has implications beyond lungs.

   "This is really the next level of modifying the organs to work better or
creating genetically engineered organs," said Keshavjee.

   The therapy can eventually be applied to other organs, like the kidney, liver
and heart, he said.

   Currently, more than 50 people are waiting for either a lung or heart
transplant in Ontario. About 20 per cent of them will die on the waiting list.

GRAPHIC:  Drs. Marcelo Cypel and Shaf Keshavjee observe a catheter delivering
the IL-10 gene into lungs. The gene helps repair damage that occurs at death.

LOAD-DATE: October 29, 2009


                              29 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2009 Sun Media Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved
                          London Free Press (Ontario)

                           October 22, 2009 Thursday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A2

LENGTH: 381 words

HEADLINE: Thumbs up for flu vaccine;
HEALTH: Canadians at higher risk of getting virus urged to get shot as quickly
as possible

BYLINE: BY CHRISTINA SPENCER, SUN MEDIA

DATELINE: OTTAWA

BODY:

   Health Canada has approved an H1N1 flu vaccine that offers close to 100%
protection against the virus, setting the stage for the biggest immunization
program in Canadian history to start within days.

   Federal health officials yesterday urged those at higher risk of getting the
virus to obtain a shot as quickly as possible, while suggesting people at lower
risk wait until the second week the vaccine is available.

   "This is a milestone in our efforts to fight H1N1 flu virus," said federal
Health Minister Leona Aglukkaq. "We are encouraging Canadians to get
vaccinated."

   The vaccine available first will be "adjuvanted" -- that is, it contains
extra ingredients to boost the immune response. A non-adjuvanted vaccine will be
available the first week of November.

   Though this country has only just begun clinical trials, Dr. Elwyn Griffiths,
director general of biologics and genetic therapies for Health Canada, said the
adjuvant has been safely tested in 45,000 people worldwide, and several
countries are sharing data.

   "This vaccine is both safe and effective," he said.

   Adverse reactions to flu vaccines are rare. Dr. David Butler-Jones, Canada's
chief health officer, said the chance of a serious reaction to a normal flu shot
is one-in-one-million. "I will be getting the pandemic H1N1 flu vaccine and I
encourage everyone to do the same," he said.

   Two million doses of the vaccine have already been sent to warehouses and in
total, the government has ordered 50.4 million doses. The government says all
who want it will get it.

   Among those who are urged to seek immunization quickly are people with
chronic health conditions such as asthma, diabetes and heart disease. Other
priority groups include pregnant women; children aged six months to five years;
and those -- such as aboriginals -- in remote communities.

   The list is rounded out with health-care workers and caregivers for
vulnerable people who can't be immunized.

   "This is not a rationing exercise ... in practical terms we're not going to
spend a lot of time trying to go through people's medical history."

   Inoculation takes about 10 days to provide immunity. Normal flu vaccines
range from 60% to 80% protection but the H1N1 vaccine "is showing in the high
90s in healthy adults," Butler-Jones said.

   christina.spencer@sunmedia.ca

GRAPHIC: photo by Andre Forget, Sun Media Dr. Isra Levy, Ottawa's Medial Officer
of Health, provides details to the media in Ottawa yesterday about Canada's
approval of an H1N1 vaccine.

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 2009


                              33 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2009 Sun Media Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved
                          London Free Press (Ontario)

                            July 29, 2009 Wednesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. B9

LENGTH: 478 words

HEADLINE: Switch flips on vaccine fast-tracking programs;
HEALTH: Canada, the U.S. and Europe for years have been working on a plan to
tackle pandemics such as the current swine flu outbreak

BYLINE: BY HELEN BRANSWELL, THE CP

DATELINE: TORONTO

BODY:

   As pharmaceutical companies rush to make swine flu vaccine, regulators in
Canada, the U.S. and Europe are flipping into gear plans they have honed over
several years on fast-tracking flu vaccine for a pandemic.

   The approaches are not identical, but are variations on a theme. Flu vaccines
have been used safely for decades and this pandemic version is just one more flu
vaccine, they say.

   "Really, the same manufacturer will be making the same vaccine and it's just
considered as a (strain) switch," explains Dr. Elwyn Griffiths, director general
of the biologics and genetic therapies directorate, the section of Health Canada
that regulates vaccines.

   Though they work within the frameworks of different laws, Health Canada, the
U.S. Food and Drug Administration and the European Medicines Agency (EMEA) all
intend to treat the pandemic vaccine as a supplement or amendment to existing
flu vaccines licences, either for seasonal or pandemic vaccine.

   The goal is to try to speed approval of the vaccine so that it can be used
before the pandemic is over -- if and when political or public health
authorities decide vaccinating all or parts of the population is the right way
to go.

   "Remember, these are two separate decisions," says Dr. Norman Baylor,
director of the FDA's office of vaccines research and review. Baylor uses his
hands during a recent meeting in Gaithersburg, Md., to explain the demarcation
between approving pandemic vaccine and ordering mass vaccination.

   "The decision to deploy the vaccine, that's over here. The decision to
license the vaccine, that's over here," he says, holding his hands out to
opposite sides of his body.

   The second "over here" is the realm of the regulatory agencies, which have
been working with the World Health Organization and each other for years on
plans for how to respond to the special demands of a pandemic. The impetus was
the dangerous H5N1 virus, which kills about 60% of people infected. Obviously
rapid action would be needed if it started a pandemic.

   "The idea was 'How can we do it? How can we move forward?' " Griffiths
explains.

   The work led to Regulatory Preparedness for Human Pandemic Influenza
Vaccines, a set of guidelines crafted by the WHO's expert panel on biological
standardization.

   Governments and their vaccine regulators realized that if pandemic vaccines
were treated like a brand new vaccine -- recently introduced products to protect
against HPV or rotaviruses, for instance -- clinical trials involving tens of
thousands of people would be needed.

   The pandemic would be over before the pandemic flu shots would be injected
into anyone but the volunteers in the clinical trials.

   That approach is obviously impractical. And regulators believe it is also
unnecessary for flu vaccines, which have been reformulated countless times to
target new virus strains in the half century or so they've been in use.

LOAD-DATE: July 29, 2009


                              34 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2009 Sun Media Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved
                          London Free Press (Ontario)

                             July 18, 2009 Saturday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. B5

LENGTH: 240 words

HEADLINE: Researchers seek faster diagnosis

BYLINE: BY SHARON LEM, SUN MEDIA

DATELINE: TORONTO

BODY:

   Diagnosing and identifying colon cancer earlier may get easier soon.

   A team of scientists at the Ontario Institute of Cancer Research and the
Ontario Cancer Institute are developing new ways to detect, diagnose and treat
colon cancer earlier.

   Dr. Bradly Wouters, senior scientist at OICR and OCI, and his team were given
a $6 million grant from Pfizer Global Research and Development and $900,000 from
the Ontario government to fight colon cancer.

   "We hope we will be able to go in and find out which genes are mutated or
altered and develop patient specific drugs which can kill only cancer cells in
patients who carry the defective gene based on the patient's genetic profile,"
Wouters said, adding that chemotherapy usually targets people in different
stages of colon cancer, whereas his research will target patients with different
types of colon cancer.

   Colorectal cancer is difficult to diagnose in its early stages. Biomarkers
and gene therapy could help with earlier diagnosis and treatment. Only recently
has genetic profiling been made available.

   Cancer biomarkers are molecular changes that can be detected in the tumour,
blood, urine or other body fluids of cancer patients.

   Biomarkers are made from the tumour itself or by the body in response to the
presence of cancer.

   "It has the potential to have a huge impact, but it's not an engineering
project, it's a science project, where you never know what you're going to
find," Wouters said.

LOAD-DATE: July 18, 2009


                              37 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2009 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                             May 21, 2009 Thursday

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. L01

LENGTH: 736 words

HEADLINE: The wounded butterflies among us;
Even a shower 'is about survival,' says woman

BYLINE: Mark A. Yearwood, Special to the Star

BODY:

   They call them the butterfly children. Afflicted with a rare genetic
disorder, the children with this painful condition have skin so delicate, so
sensitive, that even the slightest touch can damage it.

   With no known cure or treatment, epidermolysis bullosa (EB) is a cruel
disease. Because of genetic defects, the skin layers of EB patients do not
adhere properly to each other, causing areas of structural weakness. EB's
effects range from simple, but frequent and painful blisters, to open wounds
that often lead to severe disfigurement of body parts, in particularly on the
hands and feet.

   Novelette Munroe, 23, of Scarborough, knows what it is like to grow up
trapped in this fragile existence.

   Hers is a life of routine. Munroe, who arrived in Canada at age 8 from
Jamaica, has RDEB (recessive dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa), a severe form of
the disease, which afflicts her with wounds that appear spontaneously on any
part of her body.

   Munroe has constant pain from her wounds. She has recurring corneal
abrasions, where her only remedy is to wait out the agony in the dark, eyes
closed for days at a time. The sores inside her mouth and esophagus make eating
a slow and uncomfortable process.

   The lesions require daily attention - for her, a two-hour ritual of cleansing
and bandaging. "For me, a shower isn't just about hygiene, it's about survival,"
Munroe says.

   "It takes so much work just to get ready to even step out the door in the
morning. I'm fascinated that the average person can be ready in 15 minutes," she
says, sighing.

   "Thinking of other people with EB, going through the same things, helps
motivate me when I just don't feel like going through the whole process."

   She speaks softly, slowly, deliberately. This trait becomes more pronounced
as Munroe recalls her time in elementary school as one of isolation; "I did not
have many friends, and I didn't interact much with people outside of my family."

   Though EB does not impair mental abilities, Munroe was placed in special
education classes. Socially, things improved in high school with the opportunity
to attend a summer camp in Minnesota for children with various skin disorders,
where she met others with EB. She still returns each summer as a counsellor.
Through the camp, Munroe has developed a large network of friends with EB,
fuelling her desire to help others in groups such as United Survivors with
Epidermolysis Bullosa (ebsurvivors.org).

   "It's all a part of wanting to pay it forward," she says of the support
group. "We want to provide a support system and help foster independence.
Eventually we hope to start a camp specifically for children with EB."

   Munroe's life is a quiet example of the independence she wants to help
develop in others. She is enrolled as a part-time student at the University of
Toronto. Her reliance on Wheel-Trans has her regularly arriving on campus hours
early, and she is pursuing her driver's licence.

   "I am motivated to learn because my goal is to drive to school on my own,"
she says of earning her G1-level licence, "but the necessary adaptations and
costs were an issue."

   She needs specialized driver training because of the damage EB has caused to
her hands. (St. Elizabeth Health Care and dEBra Canada, the Dystrophic
Epidermolysis Bullosa Research Association, helped with driver training and
funding.)

   Scarring has fused her fingers together, and she has lost use of her right
hand. "I'm a right-handed person, so I've had to learn to use my left for
everything." She's had four surgeries to try to open and separate her fused
fingers. She uses her laptop in school, which she supplements with a note-taking
service, provided by the university.

   For her specialized medical care, Munroe sees Dr. Elena Pope at Toronto's
Hospital for Sick Children, in a clinic dedicated to EB patients. Pope, a
dermatologist, likens the wounds caused by EB to "burns that never heal."

   Pope is optimistic about a cure: "With the progress in gene therapy toward
correcting defective genes, a cure may be possible in five to 10 years."

   But Munroe is not focused on the promise of the research.

   "It's not bad to be hopeful, but it's a fine line. I'm not sitting around
waiting for some cure in the future.

   "I'm focused on being in the present moment and working with what I have."

   Her constant discomfort prompts an obvious question. "No," she replies, "I
don't really hate EB. This is the only life I have, the only body I know."

GRAPHIC:  Tara Walton Toronto Star U of T student Novelette Munroe, 23, suffers
a rare skin disorder called RDEB.

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 2009


                              38 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2009 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                              May 5, 2009 Tuesday

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. A14

LENGTH: 291 words

HEADLINE: Plugging the brain drain

BODY:

   In a commendable effort to plug a possible "brain drain" of scientific
talent, the Ontario government has launched a new $100 million fund to support
gene-related research in this province. In effect, Queen's Park is filling a
vacuum left by Ottawa, which has cut $148 million from the budgets of three
basic research granting councils.

   To be fair, the federal budget in January also included increases in other
research spending, including $2 billion over two years for building or fixing
research facilities and other science infrastructure on university and college
campuses. But what good is a new lab if there are no scientists to conduct
experiments in it?

   In the United States, the new Obama administration understands this and has
committed to spending $10 billion on health research alone. That remarkable
level of investment, coupled with the cuts implemented by the Conservative
government in Ottawa, could entice our best and brightest scientists to jobs
south of the border.

   Indeed, there is evidence this may already be happening. A top AIDS
researcher at the University of Montreal, Rafick-Pierre Sekaly, has announced
that he and his 25-member team are moving to a Florida gene therapy and vaccine
institute due, in part, to Ottawa's cuts.

   "Nothing speaks more loudly to the short-sightedness of this government than
the gutting of our scientific community," says Liberal science critic Marc
Garneau. "We're in a global competition for the talent needed to create the jobs
of tomorrow - and we're losing ground because of this government's lack of
vision."

   By instituting a new genomics fund, Queen's Park is trying to blunt such
losses. But the provinces can't address this country's research deficit alone.
They need help from Ottawa.

LOAD-DATE: May 5, 2009


                              40 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2009 Sun Media Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved
                          London Free Press (Ontario)

                              May 2, 2009 Saturday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A8

LENGTH: 1082 words

HEADLINE: The AIDS connection;
From developing a probiotic yogurt that's improving the lives of people with
AIDS in Tanzania to closing in on human trials of an AIDS vaccine, London has
become a focal point of HIV treatment and research. So credible are the efforts,
former South African archbishop Desmond Tutu will speak at a fundraiser here,
Free Press reporter Debora Van Brenk writes.

BYLINE: BY DEBORA VAN BRENK

BODY:

   33.2 million.

   That's the population of Canada.

   It's also the number of children, women and men worldwide who have HIV/AIDS.

   Now reduce those big numbers to two people with HIV -- musician Kevin Murphy
of London and Bongoni, a four-year-old "single" orphan in South Africa.

   Connecting the two is St. Joseph's Health Care London, its research program,
its foundation and its Infectious Diseases Care program.

   That's where Murphy has been getting treatment for HIV since he was diagnosed
in 2000.

   It's also through the St. Joe's program that long-time clinic nurse Brenda
Done linked with patients and HIV workers in South Africa, Lesotho and Ethiopia.

   There's now another connection between here and there:

   Archbishop emeritus Desmond Tutu -- a Nobel Peace Prize laureate, church
official and activist who has been called the conscience of Africa -- will speak
about social justice and HIV/AIDS in London on May 22 at a major fundraiser for
the St. Joseph's Health Care Foundation.

   He has become a vigorous advocate for HIV health care. His talk is expected
to highlight pioneering local work in treatment, and in research that has
worldwide implications.

   ---

   When Murphy was diagnosed with HIV in 2000, his doctor didn't even have
pamphlets about the disease.

   He moved to London to get support, treatment and to find work.

   Now he follows a daily regimen of anti-retrovirals and has no symptoms.

   "HIV doesn't really define me but it's definitely a big part of me," said
Murphy, a singer-songwriter who also is an educator with the AIDS Committee of
London. He speaks at schools about HIV, as he works to ease the stigma of the
disease and help students protect themselves against it.

   Only two anti-retrovirals (which interfere with reproduction of the virus in
an infected person) were available to patients in 1991, when Done started at the
clinic, the first HIV care centre in Ontario.

   Patients then needed to take handfuls of drugs, often several times daily.

   Now, some people control their symptoms with a single dose a day.

   "The treatment options are better. The side-effects aren't so severe," Done
said.

   But the story is different half a world away, where access to doctors or
nurses is haphazard and medications are scarce.

   Done spends her vacations volunteering in sub-Saharan Africa, where AIDS has
killed millions.

   She met a boy named Bongoni last year as he languished in a hospital in South
Africa's Northern Cape province. He was the size of a young toddler. He had
tuberculosis and couldn't walk because of complications from AIDS.

   "He would have been a poster child for malnutrition," Done recalled.

   He had no adult family because his father had died of AIDS and his mother had
dementia. (The scope of the AIDS epidemic in Africa has given rise to new
terminology: a child with one remaining parent is a "single orphan" and a
"double orphan" if AIDS has claimed both parents)

   Little Bongoni was dying, and a South African policy prevented giving
anti-retrovirals to someone with no responsible adult in his life.

   When Done left for home, her team had convinced hospital staff to start him
on anti-retrovirals and they were trying to find a home outside the hospital for
him. Done doesn't know what became of Bongoni, although friends have tried to
find him.

   "There are thousands of kids like Bongoni," she said.

   ---

   About six million South Africans -- mostly women and children -- have
HIV/AIDS.

   In South Africa, Tutu has lent his name to an HIV Centre and a tuberculosis
centre.

   A few years ago, the archbishop told staff at the HIV centre, "Those of you
who work to care for people suffering from AIDS and TB are wiping a tear from
God's eye."

   ---

   In Tanzania, the Yogurt Mamas are doing just that, improving their
neighbours' health with specialized kitchens serving up "good bacteria."

   The probiotic yogurt, developed here in London, betters the lives of people
with AIDS and may improve their fragile immune systems.

   Dr. Gregor Reid has seen the difference his ground-breaking research in
probiotics has made. Reid, chair in human microbiology and probiotics and
assistant director of the Lawson Health Research Institute in London, said in
developing countries anti-retrovirals are often unavailable or produce
unpleasant side-effects.

   Patients' ill health is exacerbated by poor nutrition and poor water quality;
diarrhea is rampant.

   Reid's research has shown people with AIDS who regularly eat probiotic yogurt
have diarrhea less often and for a shorter duration. They have more energy,
fewer symptoms.

   There are also reports, and a scientific study under way, that some
HIV-positive people, unable to gain access to anti-retrovirals, improve their
immunities with probiotic yogurt.

   UWO students help manage the Tanzania yogurt program through a venture called
Western Heads East.

   ---

   London has become a focal point for HIV treatment and research.

   UWO's Dr. Yong Kang is working to bring to human trials a vaccine he and his
team have developed.

   UWO is also bidding to build Canada's only AIDS vaccine-manufacturing
facility, an $88-million project to be bankrolled in part by the Bill and
Melinda Gates Foundation.

   It's a different scene from when Dr. Iain Mackie founded the HIV Care Clinic
here in 1990. The lifespan then of someone with AIDS was two years.

   Now the average lifespan is 13 years, and counting, for someone in his
Vancouver Hospital clinic with HIV and taking anti-retrovirals.

   He believes gene therapy holds early promise.

   Yet the difference between "the first world and the developing countries is
enormous" in terms of drug availability and treatment, Mackie said.

   If a range of anti-retrovirals were made available to people in developing
countries, their improved health might buy enough time, and help slow
transmission, until a vaccine is developed and available, he said.

   ---

   Almost all tickets have been sold for Tutu's London speaking event, despite
the $500-a-plate cost.

   "It's exciting to have a figure like that coming to London," Reid said. "He
really epitomizes the words, 'I am my brother's keeper.' "

   The fact the African leader accepted the invitation to London, out of the
many requests he receives, speaks volumes for the credibility of local research
and clinical treatment, Reid said.

   Murphy won't be at the dinner but says he would love to hear Tutu talk about
equality and understanding.

   "I would hope that he would speak about the vulnerability of all human beings
and how sometimes in this fast-paced world, we can get caught up (in) and
detached from what we're not affected by."

GRAPHIC: 1. photo by Mike Hensen London musician Kevin Murphy has been getting
treatment for HIV at St. Joseph's Health Care London since he was diagnosed in
2000. Now symptom-free, he often speaks at schools about HIV as he works to ease
the stigma of the disease and help students protect themselves against it. 2.
file photo Desmond Tutu will speak at a $550-a-plate dinner in London on May 22.

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2009


                              41 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2009 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                            April 30, 2009 Thursday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 572 words

HEADLINE: `It is amazingly helpful'

BYLINE: Emily Mathieu, Toronto Star

BODY:

   The deadline to get the 11-year-old into a program that could save her sight
was looming. So the team from the Hospital for Sick Children, carrying dishes to
collect saliva and stacks of consent forms, raced outside to the protest.

   "We are here to allow a little girl to receive a gene therapy treatment so
she won't go blind," said Dr. Elise Heon, ophthalmologist-in-chief at Sick Kids.

   Heon helped monitor the collection of saliva from Tamil protesters who have
shut down University Ave. outside the American consulate since Sunday, demanding
that Canada and the U.S. intervene in the conflict in Sri Lanka.

   Their young patient, who is legally blind and an outpatient of the hospital,
has been diagnosed with Leber congenital amaurosis (LCA), a retinal disorder
usually diagnosed soon after birth.

   Heon needed to confirm that a genetic mutation believed to be the cause of
the condition is uncommon among Sri Lankan Tamils.

   If they could do that, the girl would remain in a gene therapy trial that
could improve her sight. But the deadline to collect and test the samples was
last night.

   With the clock ticking, they needed to assemble a control group, or cluster,
of at least 50 Sri Lankan Tamils willing to donate their saliva for genetic
testing. If the genetic mutation is common among the control group, Heon's team
knows it is not causing the girl's disease.

   So the girl, who lives in Toronto and is of Sri Lankan Tamil descent, would
be dropped from the gene therapy trial, which will take place in the United
States.

   "She was being removed, so we said, 'No, no, don't remove her, we will find a
control.' So all week we have been looking for Tamil people," Heon said.

   The researchers had reached out to colleagues and friends, but by yesterday
morning they had only 36 samples. That's when they made the decision to head
outside. They did better than expected: In a short period of time the
enthusiastic crowd boosted the total to 56.

   Among the willing participants was Sritharan Ravichandran, 45. "My mouth is
dry," said Ravichandran, after making several attempts to fill the container.

   Also ready to help was Hariharan Navaratnarajah, 27.

   "I think it is great thing they are doing - it is always great to help with
scientists," said Navaratnarajah after handing over his contribution to the
team.

   "It is amazingly helpful. We can't thank the community enough for
participating in this," said Gail Billingsley, 55, a research associate.

   Toronto has a large Sri Lankan Tamil community, so the samples can be used
for additional research, she said.

   "I know it is just one person right now, but it can help others in the
future."

   Billingsley explained that the genetic mutation that qualified the child for
the trial was identified a few years ago, but only Caucasians and south Asians
were tested.

   At the time, that was considered sufficient, but improved scientific
techniques demanded deeper testing, she said.

   Since Sunday evening hundreds, occasionally thousands, of Sri Lankan Tamils
have been protesting inside a blocked off portion of University Ave. between
Dundas St. and Queen St. W.

   Catherine Deveault, a clinical research co-ordinator for Heon, said the
protesters needed very little encouragement to donate.

   "They were all very nice and very willing to participate. We didn't get any
negative reactions."

   Deveault said they expected the test results to be ready last night.

   "We were out of solutions. So we did what we had to do."

GRAPHIC:  RenE Johnston toronto Star Hariharan Navaratnarajah, 27, a Sri Lankan
Tamil from Hamilton who contributed a saliva sample to the study, talks to Dr.
Elise Heon, ophthalmologist-in-chief at the Hospital for Sick Children.

LOAD-DATE: April 30, 2009


                              42 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2009 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                             April 4, 2009 Saturday

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. L01

LENGTH: 902 words

HEADLINE: Defying the odds, his life inspires all;
Child with Canavan disease is at heart of program to help schoolchildren learn
empathy

BYLINE: Nancy J. White, Toronto Star

BODY:

   At 2 months old, Jacob Schwartz's head still flopped and his eyes didn't
track. After weeks of tests, the doctor finally gave his parents the diagnosis.
All strung together were the worst words they could have imagined: "fatal,"
"degenerative," "no cure," "no treatment."

   Their son had Canavan disease, a rare, inherited neurodegenerative disorder.
Death usually comes by age 4, although some with the disease live into their
teens and 20s.

   "Will he speak?" the parents, Ellen and Jeff, asked hopefully. The doctor
said: "No."

   "Will he sit up?" "No."

   "Will he see?" "No."

   And on it went. "Every 'no' felt like I was being stabbed with a dagger,"
Ellen remembers.

   Fast forward nearly 12 years. In the sunny family room of the Schwartzes'
Toronto home, Jacob lies on his mat with its Maple Leafs logo. The auburn-haired
boy, who can hear, is smiling broadly and making noises.

   "Sometimes he gets so excited and wound up, we can't talk," Ellen says with a
laugh as she sits on the floor next to her son.

   And there's plenty to talk about. When the boy was young, Ellen and Jeff
founded Jacob's Ladder, a charity to promote awareness and research for
neurodegenerative diseases.

   Ellen, a 42-year-old Grade 4 teacher, wrote a book, Lessons from Jacob, three
years ago and now has launched Project Give Back, a course to develop empathy
and philanthropy. This school year, she's teaching the program to 540 public and
private school students and hopes to expand next year.

   "I look at what he's gone through, his frustrations," she says, rubbing her
son's back. "Yet he smiles, happy and pure. I try to remember that in my own
life and spread it."

   The smiles were tougher to come by in Jacob's early years. "Every day was an
adjustment," says Jeff, 45. "We didn't know how to cope."

   The adjustments, the living-on-edge, continues at times.

   On his mat, Jacob occasionally makes a gurgly noise. "As he gets older, the
disease starts taking over," Ellen explains. "He has a lot of trouble managing
secretions."

   The boy is prone to infections. "Sometimes, when he's sick, he'll sleep for
seven or eight days straight. We monitor his breathing and we get very scared.
Then he'll wake up giggling and smiling. And we say, 'Ah, he's back.'"

   The family has a live-in nanny; in the evening, a visiting nurse helps out.
During the wee hours, Jacob wakes up, so Ellen and Jeff alternate duty nights,
changing diapers, repositioning, administering his medications through his
feeding tube.

   Despite his fragile condition, Jacob's no bubble boy. He goes to the Beverley
School, a downtown public school for developmentally challenged children. At
home, he enjoys a special swing in the outdoor set with his sister Beverly, 9,
and brother Ben, 6, playing around him.

   His father loves to lie next to him and watch hockey. "When I yell at the
television, he howls laughing," Jeff says. "There are significantly more good
moments than bad."

   When Jacob was 18 months old, he was enrolled in experimental gene therapy at
Yale University. (In the end, it not only didn't help, the baby developed a
severe infection and suffered a major seizure. He was in hospital for four
months.)

   A Starbucks barista in Toronto had heard about the expensive therapy and
asked Ellen, a frequent customer, if the store could help raise funds.
Uncomfortable taking the money themselves, Jeff and Ellen decided to set up a
charity for Canavan and other neurodegenerative diseases.

   Since 1998, Jacob's Ladder has raised $1.7 million, funding research and
promoting genetic screening campaigns in several cities across Canada.

   Jeff, founder and executive director of a credit counselling service, runs
the business operations and Ellen heads the fundraising.

   "I know how good I feel after we've put on a fundraiser and I know how good
the volunteers feel," she says. "I wanted to spread that feeling."

   So Ellen developed a "passion-based" program, tied into the provincial
curriculum, at the private school where she taught. Presently on leave from her
school, she has taken Project Give Back on the road, teaching it weekly to 20
Grade 4 and 5 classes in nine Toronto schools. Each student chooses a cause and
researches, writes and speaks about it, holds a fundraiser and reports back to
the charity.

   "The kids have exceeded our expectations," says Ellen about the students'
enthusiasm. "The kids inspire me."

   At John Ross Robertson elementary school, two boys stand in front of the
class talking about Right to Play, the group that uses sports to promote health
and foster peace in countries devastated by war or disease.

   "It makes me happy to give," says one boy, who sold mini balls to raise
funds. "I can't get the smile off my face."

   Early in the semester, as part of the course, Ellen brings in her elder son.
"The students are always silent. They've never seen a child like Jacob," she
explains.

   She welcomes all questions, then asks them to sing a song for Jacob. When her
son hears music, he always smiles. By the end of the class, she says, he'll be
on his floor mat with the children gathered around him, some rubbing his back.

   "They go from fear to acceptance in 40 minutes."

   Back on his mat in the family room, Jacob lets out loud giggles, his mouth
open, his eyes wide, as if he's telling a joke.

   "He's a character," Ellen says with a laugh, "a pleasure to be around."

   For more information on the school program, visit projectgiveback.com. For
the charity, go to jacobsladder.ca.

GRAPHIC:  Darren Calabrese for the toronto star Ellen Schwartz shares a moment
with her 11-year-old son Jacob in their Toronto home. Born with a rare,
inherited neurodegenerative disorder, he is living a longer and richer life than
doctors thought possible. Darren Calabrese for the toronto star Jacob Schwartz,
lying on his Maple Leaf mat, is at the centre of a family group hug with father
Jeff, mother Ellen and siblings Beverly, 9, and Ben, 6.Darren Calabrese for the
toronto star Jacob Schwartz, lying on his Maple Leaf mat, is at the centre of a
family group hug with father Jeff, mother Ellen and siblings Beverly, 9, and
Ben, 6.

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 2009


                              44 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2009 Sun Media Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved
                          London Free Press (Ontario)

                           February 17, 2009 Tuesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: ENTERTAINMENT; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 459 words

HEADLINE: London lab forges path with a gene therapy first;
HEALTH

BYLINE: BY JOHN MINER

BODY:

   Genetic engineering is quietly moving from the farm to the pharmacy, with
London as one of the world's first test sites for bacteria modified to treat
disease.

   "The approach of using genetically engineered bacteria for medical treatments
is new. This is the first clinical trial in Canada using bacteria as a delivery
vehicle for gene therapy," a Health Canada spokesperson wrote in an e-mail to
The Free Press.

   Patients with ulcerative colitis are enrolled in London, one of 14 sites in
North America and Europe, to test AGO11 -- bacteria engineered by scientists at
Belgium-based biotechnology firm ActoGenix.

   AGO11 is derived from the food bacterium lactococcus lactis, used for
centuries in the preparation of foods such as cheese and yogurt.

   It has been modified in the laboratory by ActoGenix to produce high levels of
Interleukin-10, a molecule with anti-inflammatory properties.

   The clinical trials, including ones at London Health Sciences Centre, will
test if the genetically engineered bacteria can treat the symptoms of
inflammatory bowel disease.

   The safety of the product also will be tested.

   Introduction of genetic engineering of food crops a decade ago was highly
controversial. Critics raised safety and ethical concerns.

   In Europe, protesters invaded research stations, destroying genetically
modified crops under development.

   It was feared releasing genetically altered varieties into the environment
could trigger a series of disasters, including birth defects and allergies, and
attack the human immune system and unleash new diseases.

   Other objections centred on the argument it was immoral for people to alter
life forms.

   Some European and Asian countries have banned imports of North American crops
unless exporters can prove they haven't been genetically modified.

   Despite the opposition, much of Ontario's corn and soybean crops are now
grown from genetically modified seed.

   When AGO11 is tested in people, one of the objectives is to assess if
ActoGenix's strategy to prevent the bacteria from spreading in the environment
works.

   Patients will take the bacteria in either capsule form or through an enema.

   On its website, ActoGenix says the gene essential for the bacterium to
survive outside the body was deleted.

   "The therapeutic Lactococcus lactis strain . . . dies quickly if released
into the environment," ActoGenix says.

   Dr. James Gregor, a scientist at the Lawson Health Research Institute who
leads one of the two London trials, said Health Canada requires that the
bacteria used in trials be sensitive to all antibiotics and can't survive
outside the human body on their own.

   Gregor said it will probably be about a year before there are results from
the study.

   "We are very hopeful it will be helpful for a number of people," he said.

LOAD-DATE: February 17, 2009


                              46 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2008 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                           December 20, 2008 Saturday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A04

LENGTH: 738 words

HEADLINE: Breathing new life into lungs;
T.O. researchers develop method to repair organ outside body that could boost
transplants sixfold

BYLINE: Megan Ogilvie and Joseph Hall, Toronto Star

BODY:

   Toronto researchers have pioneered a technique to repair donor lungs outside
the human body, an advance that could increase the number of usable lungs
available for transplant in Canada by up to sixfold.

   Andy Dykstra is the first patient in the world to receive a pair of lungs
repaired with the new technique that was developed by transplant surgeons at
Toronto General Hospital. The 56-year-old London, Ont., man was put on the donor
list in July after he nearly died the previous year from an acute attack of
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

   Dykstra's two-year wait for new lungs was cut down to less than five months
because surgeons were able to offer him a donor pair that would normally not
have been healthy enough to transplant.

   Twelve days after his Dec. 5 surgery at Toronto General, Dykstra was healthy
enough to go home and ready to get back to his active life.

   "I can breathe," he told the Star from his London home. "When I walk, I can
breathe. Before I couldn't do anything. I couldn't even walk around the block."

   The technique, dubbed the Toronto XVIVO Perfusion System, allows surgeons to
assess and treat donor lungs outside the body, which could increase the number
of available lungs by four to sixfold, said Dr. Shaf Keshavjee, the director of
Toronto General's lung transplant program, who helped pioneer the technique.

   Currently, only about 10 to 15 per cent of harvestable lungs are suitable for
transplantation due to injuries that are most often caused by swelling in the
organs, Keshavjee said.

   The severe brain injuries that predominantly make a set of donor lungs
available also trigger damage to those organs through the release of
inflammatory enzymes.

   "Not only are we taking organs and transplanting them, but now we are on the
threshold of improving them," he said.

   The new procedure may also be applicable to other organs, including hearts,
kidneys and livers, said Dr. Gary Levy, director of the hospital's Multi Organ
Transplant Program.

   Lungs are currently preserved by putting them on ice, said Keshavjee, a
strategy that simply slows down the organ-death process. This cooling keeps the
lungs viable for about six hours, he said.

   The Toronto System preserves the lungs under a Star Trek-like domed apparatus
at body temperature - 37 degrees Celsius - by pumping a bloodless,
oxygen-carrying solution through the organs, while they expand and contract on a
respirator.

   This more than doubles the time the lungs can be preserved to up to at least
12 - and potentially 18 - hours, said Keshavjee. During that time, the organ can
utilize its own regenerative powers to fix itself, something that does not
happen when lungs are stored in the current cooling technique. Or, doctors can
use anti-inflammatory drugs, or even future gene and stem cell therapies, to
repair the organ at a molecular level.

   "Rather than taking an organ that is slowly dying and slowly deteriorating,
we can actually either keep it static, or more importantly make it better,"
Keshavjee said. It may also be possible to prepare the lungs with gene therapies
that would ensure the recipient's body did not reject them, a major problem with
almost all donated organs.

   Dr. Leo Ginns, medical director of the lung transplant program at
Massachusetts General Hospital, called the Toronto effort "groundbreaking" and
"encouraging," and said he believed the technique could be adopted by other
transplant teams around the world.

   He noted that the technique must be proven on many more patients before it
could become standard of care.

   Right now, about 80 people are waiting for either a lung or heart-lung
transplant in Ontario. Roughly 20 per cent of those patients will die on the
wait list.

   Keshavjee said the Toronto System could allow Toronto General to double the
number of lung transplants it performs, from 100 to 200 surgeries a year, in the
near future.

   Dykstra's new lungs were the fourth the hospital has transplanted using the
Toronto System. But his were the first to be repaired prior to transplantation.
Patient confidentiality would not allow Keshavjee to reveal what those injuries
were.

   Dykstra can hardly believe that he's home with a healthy new pair of lungs
just two weeks after Keshavjee suggested he take part in the hospital's clinical
trial.

   "The more he explained it to me, I knew I had to have this," he said. "It
felt so right. The hairs were literally standing up on my arms as he was
explaining it to me."

GRAPHIC:  craig glover for the toronto star Andy Dykstra reveals the surgical
scars from his double-lung transplant. The lungs he received were the first pair
repaired using new technique.

LOAD-DATE: December 20, 2008


                              50 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2008 Sun Media Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved
                          London Free Press (Ontario)

                           August 20, 2008 Wednesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: ENTERTAINMENT; Discovery ; Pg. C4

LENGTH: 330 words

HEADLINE: Gene doping;
Repoxygen is a new way to artificially enhance an athlete's performance -- one
that is hard to detect and with potentially permanent effects

BYLINE: BY FINDING THE GOLDEN GENES, PATRICK BARRY AND WWW.SCIENCENEWS.ORG

BODY:

   HOW IT WORKS

   Repoxygen was developed as a gene therapy treatment for severe anemia. A
patient is injected with a harmless virus carrying a modified gene that encodes
erythropoietin, a protein that boosts red blood cell production. The host's
cells can translate that gene into active proteins as if the foreign gene were
the cells' own.

   1. DELIVERY

   DNA packaged in a virus is injected into the athlete and flows through the
bloodstream into muscle.

   Danger: Altered viruses can trigger dangerous reactions from the immune
system.

   Alternatives: Viruses are not the only way to deliver performance-enhancing
genes to cells. Fat molecules or naked DNA can be injected directly into muscle.

   2. CHANGE

   Viruses bind to muscle cells and deposit the foreign gene inside, where it
integrates into the cell's chromosomes. The gene stimulates the production of
the protein erythropoietin (EPO).

   Danger: Inserting foreign DNA can damage the cell's own genes, risking
cancer.

   Detection: Presence of a foreign gene in the athlete's DNA.

   3. DISPERSAL

   Erythropoietin (EPO), produced by the altered muscle cells, flows through the
bloodstream to bone marrow, stimulating production of red blood cells, the
body's main transporter of oxygen.

   Detection: Changes in the concentration of multiple proteins in the blood or
urine.

   4. ENHANCEMENT

   Extra red blood cells flow throughout the athlete's body, increasing oxygen
capacity and, hence, endurance.

   ---

   OTHER GENE DOPING POSSIBILITIES

   In 1988, H. Lee Sweeney and colleagues at the University of Pennsylvania
School of Medicine injected mice with a virus carrying a gene that boosted
production of insulin-growth factor (IGF-1). The injected mice had 15% more
muscle mass than untreated mice.

   In 2004, Ronald Evans and colleagues at California's Salk Institute for
Biological Studies engineered mice to have extra copies of the gene encoding a
protein called peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor delta (PPAR-delta).
These mice could run twice as far a unaltered mice.

GRAPHIC: graphic by Susie Mah, Sun Media

LOAD-DATE: August 20, 2008


                              60 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2008 Sun Media Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved
                          London Free Press (Ontario)

                             April 28, 2008 Monday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 528 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy improves sight in near-blind patients;
MEDICINE: Two teams of doctors report successes in treating Leber congenital
amaurosis

BYLINE: BY REUTERS

DATELINE: LONDON, ENGLAND

BODY:

   Gene therapy for a rare type of inherited blindness has improved the vision
of four patients who tried it, boosting hopes for the troubled field of gene
repair technology.

   Two teams of doctors reported successes in using gene therapy to treat Leber
congenital amaurosis, or LCA.

   LCA damages light receptors in the retina. It usually begins affecting sight
in early childhood and causes total blindness by the time a patient is 30. There
is no treatment.

   Both teams used a common cold virus to deliver a normal version of one
damaged gene that causes the disease, called RPE65, directly into the eyes of
patients.

   Although both trials were only testing for safety, patients reported they
could see a little better afterward, the researchers told a meeting of eye
specialists in Florida and also reported in the New England Journal of Medicine.

   Dr. Katherine High of the Children's Hospital of Philadelphia and the Howard
Hughes Medical Institute and colleagues said all three of their volunteers had
improved vision after the treatments.

   Dr. Robin Ali of University College London and colleagues said one of their
three volunteers got better.

   Because the patients were adults, already had severe sight loss and received
only low doses of treatment, researchers had not expected to see a benefit at
all.

   "This result is important for the entire field of gene therapy," said High, a
former president of the American Society of Gene Therapy.

   One volunteer in Ali's trial, Steven Howarth, said he had significant
improvement in night vision, allowing him to navigate a simulation of a
night-time street.

   "Now, my sight when it's getting dark or it's badly lit is definitely better.
It's a small change -- but it makes a big difference to me," Howarth said in a
statement.

   "The fact we see any evidence of improvement under these circumstances gives
great hopes for the effectiveness of the treatment," Ali said.

   In High's trial, three patients aged 19, 26 and 26, all reported better
vision.

   "Patients' vision improved from detecting hand movements to reading lines on
an eye chart," said Dr. Albert Maguire of Children's Hospital.

   In each case, only one eye was treated, so the other eye could be used as a
"control" to tell whether vision improved.

   Ali and his team are working on the research with Targeted Genetics Corp,
which made the genetically engineered virus. The Children's Hospital and
University of Pennsylvania team developed their own virus, called a vector, to
carry the corrective gene.

   The next stage of testing will involve treating children, whose eyes have
deteriorated less and who have a better chance of improving, Ali said.

   "We are pretty convinced that once we can do this with younger children we
will be able to arrest the damage," said Targeted Genetics Chief Executive
Stewart Parker.

   One important thing both teams were looking for was proof the virus did not
leave the eye. "It stays in there. It doesn't go anywhere else," Parker said.

   Both safety and efficacy have held back the field of gene therapy. One
experiment cured two French boys with a rare immune disorder but gave them
leukemia in 2002, and an Arizona teenager died in a 1999 gene therapy
experiment.

GRAPHIC: 2 photos by AP 1. This image, released by Moorfields Eye Hospital and
University College London, shows an artist's rendering of a subretinal surgery
in which a dose of normal gene is injected into the back of the eye to replace
the defective gene in the cells. 2. Steven Howarth, 18, is shown at his home in
Bolton, England. Howarth recently underwent surgery to improve his vision.

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 2008


                              61 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2008 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                             April 28, 2008 Monday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A02

LENGTH: 706 words

HEADLINE: Breakthrough for the blind;
Scientists restore vision in technique experts say offers hope for variety of
inherited eye diseases

BYLINE: Stephanie Nano, ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: NEW YORK

BODY:

   Scientists for the first time have used gene therapy to dramatically improve
sight in people with a rare form of blindness, a development experts called a
major advance for the experimental technique.

   Some vision was restored in four of the six young people who got the
treatment, teams of researchers in the United States and Britain reported
yesterday. Two of the volunteers who could only see hand motions were able to
read a few lines of an eye chart within weeks.

   "It's a phenomenal breakthrough," said Stephen Rose, chief research officer
of the Foundation Fighting Blindness, which helped pay for one study done at
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia.

   If successful in larger numbers, experts said, the technique has the
potential to reverse blindness from other kinds of inherited eye diseases.

   "I think this is incredibly exciting," said Dr. Jean Bennett, a professor of
ophthalmology at the University of Pennsylvania and a leader of the Philadelphia
study. "It's the beginning of a whole new phase of studies."

   The research was published online yesterday by the New England Journal of
Medicine in conjunction with presentations at a medical meeting in Florida.

   The two teams of scientists, working separately, each tested gene replacement
therapy in three patients with a form of a rare hereditary eye disease called
Leber's congenital amaurosis. There's no treatment for the disease, which
appears early in infancy and causes severe vision loss, especially at night.

   An estimated 2,000 Americans have the form of the disease they targeted,
Bennett said.

   Gene therapy - replacing faulty genes with a normal version - has been
studied in humans for more than 15 years with limited success.

   The early results of the eye experiments should give the field a boost, some
experts said.

   "I think it's really a big shot in the arm for gene therapy and for medicine
in general," said Dr. Ronald Crystal, head of genetic medicine at Weill Cornell
Medical College in New York.

   Each of the study participants had mutations in a gene that makes a protein
needed by the retina, which senses light and sends images to the brain. Those
without the gene gradually lose sight until they are blind in early adulthood.

   The retina itself stays in relatively good shape for a while, making it a
good candidate for gene therapy, said Robin Ali, a professor at University
College London, who led the British team. He likened the defective gene to a
missing spark plug in a car engine.

   "The whole engine can be absolutely fine, but if it doesn't have a spark
plug, the car's not going to work," said Ali.

   For the experiment, the scientists injected millions of copies of a working
gene beneath the retina in the back of the eye. Only one eye was treated, the
worst one, in case anything went wrong; the untreated eye was used for
comparison. After treatment, patients' eyesight and light sensitivity were
measured periodically; mobility was tested in a maze or obstacle course.

   All three of those treated in Philadelphia showed significant improvement in
their vision, the researchers said. The volunteers - two women, 19 and 26, and a
man, 26 - were from Italy, where they had been screened by researchers there.
The longest follow-up was six months.

   Besides reading lines on an eye chart, they could see better in dim light,
Bennett said.

   "We were not expecting to restore their vision to 20/20," she said.

   In the British group, the treatment only worked in 18-year-old Steven
Howarth, whose disease was less advanced than the other two - a girl, 17, and a
man, 23, who was followed for a year.

   Howarth said he used to rush home from school because he was worried about
getting around in the dark, according to remarks issued by the university.

   "Now, my sight when it's getting dark or it's badly lit is definitely better.
It's a small change, but it makes a big difference to me," said Howarth, who
lives in Bolton, near Manchester.

   After the injection last July, Howarth said his eye felt like sandpaper. It
was better after a week, and his eyesight gradually improved. He was able to
negotiate a dimly lit maze in 14 seconds without bumping into any obstacles;
before it took him 77 seconds with eight errors.

   There were no serious side effects reported in either group.

GRAPHIC:  ap photo Steven Howarth, 18, of Bolton, England, above, has better
vision in dim light after millions of copies of a working gene were injected in
the back of his eye, left.

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 2008


                              62 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2008 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                             April 28, 2008 Monday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A03

LENGTH: 379 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy breakthrough for the blind;
Patients could read from eye chart within weeks

BYLINE: Stephanie Nano, ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: NEW YORK

BODY:

   Scientists have used gene therapy to dramatically improve sight in people
with a rare form of blindness, a development experts called a major advance for
the experimental technique.

   Some vision was restored in four of the six young people who got the
treatment, teams of researchers in the United States and Britain reported
yesterday. Two of the volunteers who could only see hand motions were able to
read a few lines of an eye chart within weeks.

   "It's a phenomenal breakthrough," said Stephen Rose, chief research officer
of the Foundation Fighting Blindness, which helped pay for one study done at
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia.

   If successful in larger numbers, experts said, the technique could reverse
blindness from other kinds of inherited eye diseases.

   The research was published online yesterday by the New England Journal of
Medicine.

   The two teams of scientists, working separately, each tested gene replacement
therapy in three patients with a form of a rare hereditary eye disease called
Leber's congenital amaurosis. There's no treatment for the disease, which
appears early in infancy and causes severe vision loss, especially at night.

   An estimated 2,000 Americans have the form of the disease they targeted.

   Gene therapy - replacing faulty genes with a normal version - has been
studied in humans for more than 15 years with limited success.

   Each of the study participants had mutations in a gene that makes a protein
needed by the retina, which senses light and sends images to the brain. Those
without the gene gradually lose sight until they are blind in early adulthood.

   The retina itself stays in relatively good shape for a while, making it a
good candidate for gene therapy, said Robin Ali, a professor at University
College London, who led the British team. He likened the defective gene to a
missing spark plug in a car engine.

   For the experiment, the scientists injected millions of copies of a working
gene beneath the retina in the back of the eye. Only one eye was treated, the
worst one, in case anything went wrong; the untreated eye was used for
comparison.

   All three of those treated in Philadelphia showed significant improvement in
their vision, the researchers said. Besides reading lines on an eye chart, they
could see better in dim light.

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 2008


                              64 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2008 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                              March 3, 2008 Monday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A03

LENGTH: 670 words

HEADLINE: New hope for Ajax 'bubble boy';
Cutting-edge therapy done in Milan appears to be boosting child's immune system

BYLINE: Joseph Hall, Toronto Star

BODY:

   Tracy Kulas-DesLauriers holds her son firmly by the shoulders and pleads with
him, with exasperated bemusement, to please stop spinning.

   "It will make you dizzy, Parker. It will make you fall down!"

   But when she lets go, he's a human top again; twirling, twirling, running
toddler circles around his kneeling mother and around all that medical expertise
that said he likely wouldn't do what he has so obviously and gleefully done.

   Parker DesLauriers has ADA-deficient severe combined immunodeficiency - a
form of "bubble boy" disease.

   With the frenzied energy of a 2-year-old bent on being naughty, he has every
appearance of brimming health.

   But his immune system remains massively compromised and Parker, who
celebrated his second birthday in January, is a virtual prisoner in his
antiseptic Ajax home.

   "We've been confined, basically for two years and it's taxing. I mean it gets
to you after a while," his mother says.

   Basically, the only time he leaves the house is for twice-monthly visits to
the Hospital for Sick Children, she says.

   The disease, a rare genetic ailment caused by one malfunctioning gene on
chromosome 20, leaves him with almost no working T and B blood cells, which are
essential to a body's immune system. Without these white blood cell components,
Parker is almost entirely unable to fend off any harmful virus or bacteria he
encounters.

   But there's hope in his mother's voice now, and a rising confidence that one
day, maybe soon, her little boy will enjoy a normal childhood.

   Because, deep in Parker's bone marrow, a seeding of genetically modified stem
cells may be sprouting a new immune system.

   "We have reason to believe that it's definitely working," Kulas-DesLauriers
says of the cutting-edge gene therapy her son received in Italy.

   The process, which took place in Milan last May, involved harvesting Parker's
bone marrow, from which doctors removed a number of the stem cells that can
produce every type of blood cell, including the disease-fighting cells Parker
lacks.

   Then, using a virus as a transporting vector, they inserted a healthy gene
into the stem cells to counteract its defective counterpart. That gene produced
an enzyme known as ADA, which is critical in protecting T cells from rapid
destruction in the body. Without T cells, antibody-producing B cells do not
perform properly either, leaving the entire immune system in shambles.

   The genetically altered stem cells were reintroduced into Parker's marrow.
Now, some nine months later, his T and B blood cells have substantially
improved.

   When he was born, Parker had a lymphocyte count of 80, his mother says. Now
it fluctuates between 700 and 900, she says. A normal count would be about
2,000, doctors say.

   "The main thing now is the fact that he is producing these cells, something
he was never able to do on his own before," she says.

   Parker will return to Italy this May for a one-year follow-up. Meanwhile, the
quarantine of the outside world from the family's Ajax home must be maintained.

   "He can't play with his little cousins or anything ... little kids are
bacteria carriers," says grandfather Roy Kulas, who, with his wife, Parker's
fraternal grandparents and the boy's parents, are the only people allowed to
pick the toddler up.

   "Still, he's a good happy lad, and a joy to be around," Kulas says.

   Financially, the disease has been devastating for his parents, who both had
to quit their jobs as teachers - with their professional obligation to be around
kids and germs - after Parker was born.

   They've been living off savings, fundraising events and support from family
and friends. "I had a nice house, I had a great job, I had everything going for
me and now all of a sudden, I'm in this position where I need to ask for help,"
Parker's mother says. "I'm going to lose this house. I'm going to lose
everything that we've worked so hard to get."

   The family will be holding a fundraising golf tournament June 1 at the 4
Seasons Golf Club in Claremont. Anyone wishing to buy tickets or donate can
email golfingforparker @ gmail.com

GRAPHIC:  rick eglinton toronto star Two-year-old Parker DesLauriers loves to
play with his grandfather Roy Kulas, one of the few people allowed to have
physical contact with him.

LOAD-DATE: March 3, 2008


                              69 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2007 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                           October 24, 2007 Wednesday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A17

LENGTH: 739 words

HEADLINE: Cell 'suicide' called key to diseases;
Winner of Canada's Gairdner Award and Nobel Prize to address conference

BYLINE: Joseph Hall, Toronto Star

BODY:

   The faint genetic signals that tell a cell to commit suicide may be key
players in a host of the world's most common and lethal diseases, a Nobel
Prize-winning biologist will tell a Toronto conference this week.

   With a suspected link to everything from heart attacks and liver disease to
cancer and diabetes, the genetic mechanism that leads to the programmed death of
cells is emerging as one of the most important research targets in medical
science.

   "It turns out that cellular suicide is fundamental ... in many human
diseases," says Robert Horvitz, of the Howard Hughes Institute in Cambridge,
Mass. "As you might imagine, if you misregulate cell death, something is going
to go wrong."

   Horvitz, also a professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, won
the 2002 Nobel Prize in medicine for work on the genetic regulation of cells and
programmed cell death, also known as apoptosis.

   That work also resulted in a 1999 Gairdner Award, Canada's largest and most
prestigious scientific prize. The Gairdner Foundation, which oversees the annual
$30,000 awards, is presenting a series of lectures this week in Toronto leading
up to the awards dinner Saturday for the five 2007 recipients.

   This year's lecture series will focus on cancer research. And misfiring
cellular suicide mechanisms have long been a focus of investigations into their
role in keeping cancerous cells alive and proliferating.

   But more recently, Horvitz says the suicide signals have been pegged as key
players in many other serious ailments, with their failure to turn on or off
when required being increasingly seen as a crucial step in the onset or
progression of disease.

   Programmed cell death might seem "surprising and counterintuitive" to most
people, since many believe the goal of all living organisms is survival.

   "But the phenomenon actually, if you think about it, is one that most of us
do know, but didn't realize and think about in that way," says Horvitz, who sits
on the Gairdner Awards committee. "When a tadpole becomes a frog, the cells in
the tail of the tadpole die and they do so by committing suicide."

   Likewise, a baby in the womb has webbing between its fingers, which also
disappears through this programming, Horvitz says.

   Indeed, apoptosis occurs throughout life, with old, damaged or redundant
cells giving way to new ones. But when that suicide signalling system, turned on
by genes within the cells themselves, goes awry, many thing can happen - most of
them bad.

   For example, neurodegenerative diseases such as Parkinson's, Alzheimer's and
ALS all result when too many nerve cells are killed off.

   "Also with stroke, traumatic brain injuries, heart attacks, congestive heart
failure and many liver and kidney diseases, what's happening is that cells that
should stay alive instead die," Horvitz says.

   In heart attacks, for example, it was long thought that cardiac muscle damage
was caused solely by oxygen deprivation to the organ's muscle tissues when major
coronary arteries were blocked.

   Likewise with liver disease, it was assumed that the consumption of toxic
substances - usually excessive amounts of alcohol - were killing off the tissue.

   "But the alcohol itself doesn't kill, it rather induces suicide and that's
the big surprise," Horvitz says.

   "In heart attacks, what's happening by and large ... is that there is oxygen
deprivation that challenges the cells, which then kill themselves."

   There are also ailments where cells should die but don't, says Horvitz, who
cites autoimmune conditions such as diabetes and Crohn's disease, which turn the
body against itself.

   "What happens is those cells in the immune system that should die because
they attack self, don't die and then they attack your body from within," Horvitz
says.

   "Cancer is (also) a disease in which cells that should die, don't."

   Horvitz's work has focused on a microscopic roundworm known as C. elegans and
the cellular suicide mechanisms at work in that tiny creature. He says he's
found at least four genes in the worm that are mainly responsible for turning
its suicide signalling on or off.

   And he says variations of those genes, and more importantly the types of
pathways they regulate, have been well preserved up the evolutionary chain to
human beings.

   Finding ways to regulate this genetic suicide programming - either through
the development of drugs or gene therapies - may have profound effects on the
treatment of a huge number of disorders, Horvitz says.

LOAD-DATE: October 24, 2007


                              70 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2007 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                           September 28, 2007 Friday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A03

LENGTH: 686 words

HEADLINE: 'We're on our way to success';
Parker DesLauriers and his parents return from Italy with renewed hope for the
little boy with rare immune deficiency

BYLINE: Theresa Boyle, Toronto Star

BODY:

   When Parker DesLauriers' mother pushed his stroller through the arrivals gate
at Pearson International Airport yesterday, throngs of adoring relatives and
friends crowded around the tot, whom they smiled and waved at, but could not
touch.

   Blowing kisses and laughing from behind a plastic shield around his stroller,
the chubby-cheeked 20-month-old boy looked the picture of health despite having
a seriously compromised immune system.

   Parker had just returned from Italy, where he spent the last six months
undergoing experimental gene therapy, which his parents say has given him a
fighting chance to beat the rare condition with which he was born, dubbed
"boy-in-the-bubble" disease.

   "We're definitely on our way to success," exclaimed his mother, Tracy
Kulas-DesLauriers, 32.

   "I totally believe it will work out in the end. And if for some reason it
doesn't, then we'll do whatever we have to do to make sure it works later," she
added.

   The Ajax lad was born with ADA-deficient severe combined immunodeficiency.
Each of his parents unknowingly carried a copy of a defective gene, which they
passed to him. So rare is the disease that the Hospital for Sick Children has
treated only 15 patients with it in the last two decades.

   Without treatment, Parker would probably die before age 2.

   The therapy he received in Milan is not available in Canada. It involved
harvesting his bone marrow, extracting stem cells and genetically altering them.
The cells were then re-injected into the boy.

   The treatment is Parker's best hope for long-term survival.

   "It's successful so far. It's a long-term thing and it's going to take a
while for us to figure out how well it worked," explained Parker's father, Kevin
DesLauriers, 35.

   The gene therapy trial is being conducted by Dr. Alessandro Aiuti and the
results will eventually be published in a medical journal. In the meantime,
Parker's family is not at liberty to discuss some details of his treatment.

   They said Parker suffered a setback shortly after the genetically altered
stem cells were re-injected and at one point it was feared the treatment had
failed.

   "Even though he didn't have the greatest (initial) response, he had a lot of
cells given back to him, which is definitely an advantage. He has engrafted,"
his mother said.

   Parker will have to visit the Hospital for Sick Children every two weeks for
blood tests and next spring, he will return to Italy for additional testing.

   At Terminal 1 yesterday, the family's relatives and friends welcomed them
home with balloons, flowers and toys.

   "You can see it. He's so loved. He's never played with his cousins," remarked
his mother, noting the boy is allowed very limited contact with others because
of his compromised immune system.

   "He's not out of the woods yet," said a teary-eyed Roy Kulas, Parker's
grandfather.

   Kulas scrubbed his daughter's home from top to bottom with Lysol in
preparation for Parker's return. The boy has to live in extremely sanitary
conditions with few visitors.

   "It's probably the cleanest house in the whole of Toronto. You don't want to
take a chance," Kulas said.

   Only Parker's grandparents are allowed to pick him up.

   His parents always carry a bottle of sanitizer with them and there are other
bottles in every room of their home.

   They got nervous during the nine-hour trip home whenever they heard someone
cough or sneeze.

   But they were full of praise for Air Canada, for giving them free flights.

   DesLauriers and Kulas-DesLauriers have turned their lives upside down for
their son.

   Both teachers, Parker's parents took leaves from their jobs - his mother two
years ago and his father 18 months ago.

   Kulas-DesLauriers plans to stay home with Parker, and her husband is
considering a new career in the computer field.

   "That's the stress now," she said. "It's a financial stress."

   Italian fundraising covered the cost of the gene therapy and the family's
accommodation. But they've still had to make their monthly mortgage payments and
cover their own expenses.

   The family has a blog documenting Parker's journey and providing information
on making financial donations. Visit the blog at: www.scidada.blogspot.com

GRAPHIC:  Tony Bock toronto star Parker DesLauriers returns to Toronto with his
parents yesterday after six months in Italy, where he underwent treatment to
help him fight a rare genetic condition that severely weakened his immune
system.

LOAD-DATE: September 28, 2007


                              72 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2007 Sun Media Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved
                          London Free Press (Ontario)

                             July 14, 2007 Saturday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: ENTERTAINMENT; Pg. C5

LENGTH: 338 words

HEADLINE: Best Bets Tonight

BYLINE: BY FREE PRESS NEWS SERVICES

BODY:

   MUST-SEE

   Freaky Friday (2003): 8-11 p.m., ABC. Jamie Lee Curtis and Lindsay Lohan play
a mother and daughter, accidentally exchanging bodies. It's a remake of the 1977
film of the same name, featuring Jodie Foster, which was one of Disney's best
non-cartoons.

   OTHER CHOICES

   The Unit: 8 p.m., CBS. This rerun has the team in Germany for a competition
among counterterrorism units. When things turn deadly, it's clear someone is
turning this into actual terrorism.

   Myth Busters: 8 p.m., Discovery. Adam and Jamie try to find the perfect
cocktail of Mentos and fizzy candy, while the rest of the crew find out whether
you can really crash a helicopter by sticking a postage stamp on the propeller.

   One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest: 8 p.m., AMC. Jack Nicholson manages to get
evil Nurse Ratched all hot and bothered as an anti-establishment screwup who
wreaks havoc on a soul-crushing insane asylum.

   Bridget Jones: The Edge of Reason (2004): 8-10 p.m., TBS. This sequel doesn't
match the 2001 original, but it has its moments. Watch Bridget (Renee Zellweger)
explain to cellmates what's wrong with her guy. And watch the guys (Hugh Grant,
Colin Firth) with their upper-class English version of a fistfight.

   America's Got Talent: 8:30 and 10 p.m., NBC. The Tuesday and Wednesday
editions are reruns, showing the second round in Las Vegas.

   ReGenesis: 9 p.m., Global. Carlos convinces David to supply a Houston lab
with contraband stem cells, so his friend -- who's dying of AIDS -- can be the
first guinea pig to test a radical gene therapy.

   Out of Sight: 9 p.m., History. This is the one that made Jennifer Lopez a
star, though for once, she deserved the praise, going toe-to-toe with an
ultra-suave George Clooney as a federal marshal assigned to bring a bank robber
back to prison.

   Without a Trace: 9 p.m., CBS. In a rerun, Elena and Danny (Roselyn Sanchez
and Enrique Murciano) go undercover as a stripper and a customer.

   Saturday Night Live: 11:30 p.m., NBC, Global. This rerun has Rainn Wilson
(The Office) as host, with music by Arcade Fire.

GRAPHIC: photo Lindsay Lohan and Jamie Lee Curtis in Freaky Friday.

LOAD-DATE: July 14, 2007


                              74 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2007 Sun Media Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved
                          London Free Press (Ontario)

                              June 25, 2007 Monday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFESTYLE; Pg. D6

LENGTH: 667 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy shows early promise for Parkinson's;
Billions of copies of a gene are slipped into the brain to calm overactive
circuitry.

BYLINE: BY AP

DATELINE: NEW YORK

BODY:

   An experimental treatment for Parkinson's disease seemed to improve symptoms
-- dramatically so, for one 59-year-old man -- without causing side-effects in
an early study of a dozen patients.

   The gene therapy treatment involved slipping billions of copies of a gene
into the brain to calm overactive brain circuitry.

   The small study focused on testing the safety of the procedure rather than
its effectiveness, and experts cautioned it's too soon to draw conclusions about
how well it works. But they called the results promising and said the approach
merits further studies.

   "We still have quite a bit more testing to do," said Dr. Michael Kaplitt of
Weill Cornell Medical College in New York, an author of the study.

   Still, "the initial results are extremely encouraging."

   Kaplitt and collaborators report their results in this week's issue of the
British medical journal, The Lancet.

   They're not alone in trying gene therapy for Parkinson's. In April, another
team told a medical meeting that its experiments, which delivered a different
kind of gene to a different part of the brain, also appeared safe and gave a
preliminary hint of benefit.

   More than half a million Americans have Parkinson's. They endure symptoms
that include tremors, rigidity in their limbs, slowness of movement and impaired
balance and co-ordination. Eventually they can become severely disabled.

   Nathan Klein, a 59-year-old freelance television producer in Port Washington,
N.Y., said the disease left him "pretty messed up." It weakened his voice,
impaired his walking and made his hand tremble so badly he couldn't hold a glass
of wine without spilling it all.

   Klein was the first patient to be treated with Kaplitt's gene therapy
procedure in 2003, and he said his symptoms gradually subsided afterward.
Nowadays, he said, apart from freezing now and then when he wants to walk, the
symptoms are basically gone.

   "I'm elated," said Klein, who continues to take his regular pills for the
disease. "It's unbelievable."

   Kaplitt, who has a financial interest in Neurologix Inc., which paid for the
research, noted that the 12 patients in the study still have Parkinson's
symptoms.

   The amount of medication they were already taking for their symptoms didn't
change significantly in the year after the surgery.

   Current medicines can control symptoms, but can't stop the disease from
getting worse over time, and they can produce troublesome side effects like
uncontrollable movement.

   Patients gain relief from a surgical treatment called deep brain stimulation,
in which electrodes are placed in the brain and connected to a programmable
stimulator.

   Kaplitt's procedure was aimed at achieving the same goal as that surgery,
calming overactive circuitry in the brain. It gets overactive because it loses
the normal supply of a chemical called GABA.

   The gene therapy was designed to make the brain produce more GABA.

   For the gene therapy surgery, a tube about the width of a hair was threaded
through a hole about the size of a quarter at the top of the skull.

   The tube delivered a dose of a virus engineered to ferry copies of a gene
into cells of a brain region called the subthalamic nucleus. The gene copies
enable the cells to pump out more GABA.

   The Lancet paper reports that over a year, patients showed no side-effects
from the procedure. What's more, they showed improvements in an overall
assessment of symptoms like tremors, stiffness and walking problems.

   The improvements were evident at a checkup three months after the procedure
and persisted to the end of the study, one year after the surgery, researchers
reported. By that time, the overall amount of improvement from before surgery
was about 24 per cent when measured at times that patients were off their normal
medication, and 27 per cent at times when they were on medication.

   Most of the effect appeared on just one side of the body. Because of concerns
about safety with the untested procedure, the researchers treated only the brain
circuitry controlling one side of the body.

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 2007


                              77 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2007 Sun Media Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved
                          London Free Press (Ontario)

                             June 14, 2007 Thursday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: CITY & REGION; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 348 words

HEADLINE: Protein thought to be link to aging diseases

BYLINE: BY GLYNNIS MAPP, SUN MEDIA

BODY:

   Scientists believe a breakthrough discovery could help them better understand
and eventually treat "one of the worst aging diseases."

   Dr. Michael Strong, a clinical neurology professor at the University of
Western Ontario, unveiled a new protein at an annual conference.

   He said yesterday the discovery will help clarify the symptoms of
nerve-destroying amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), also known as Lou Gehrig's
disease.

   The protein, TDP-43, is a key player in the facilitation of riboneuclaic
acid, which carries genetic instructions to the body's motor neurons.

   Lou Gehrig's disease affects the nerves in the brain, affecting the cells
controlling voluntary muscle activities such as speaking, walking and breathing.
It often causes paralysis.

   Strong said the disease's progression is much like a neurological game of
broken telephone.

   "Think of your cells like building a house," he said. "It's as if the
suppliers gave you 2x4 planks to build the outer walls when you asked for 2x6.
They don't fit. "

   Strong said these "suppliers," or riboneuclaic acid, give instructions like
blueprints to motor neurons to build protein in the body.

   "Your genes send the wrong messages and the random dysregulation of this
information to produce the wrong proteins," he said. "We've now found the
protein that may contribute to this blockage."

   His new findings appear in the June issue of the scientific journal Molecular
and Cellular Neuroscience.

   Of the three main age-related diseases affecting Canadians -- Parkinson's,
Alzheimer's and Lou Gehrig's disease -- Strong said the latter is the most
aggressive.

   The ALS Society of Canada says about 3,000 Canadians live with the illness.

   In discovering the TDP-43 protein, researchers also believe they may have
found a key to unlocking why some people experience dementia

   Strong hopes a $250,000 research project will lead to gene therapy treatment.

   "This means a lot to the people who are suffering with the disease and their
families," he said. "Now, we're just one step closer to understanding the
connection between ALS symptoms and and other diseases."

LOAD-DATE: June 14, 2007


                              78 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2007 Sun Media Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved
                          London Free Press (Ontario)

                             May 24, 2007 Thursday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: CITY & REGION; Pg. C3

LENGTH: 526 words

HEADLINE: Famous car show boosts charities;
London philanthropist Steve Plunkett holds the event in honour of his parents.

BYLINE: BY GLYNNIS MAPP, SUN MEDIA

BODY:

   Steve Plunkett was five when he fell in love with cars.

   As the romance continued, he made his first four-wheel purchase at age 16 --
a white 1963 Chevy Impala convertible.

   Now, the London philanthropist is owner of a large collection of vintage
vehicles -- and host to what is believed to be the largest classic car show in
Canada.

   Plunkett is revving up his engines to raise money for charity. His
"automotive extravaganza," the annual Fleetwood Country Cruize-in, will be held
on his lavish 40-hectare estate in London from June 8 to 10.

   "I didn't expect it to get this big. It all happened largely by accident,"
Plunkett said. "It was all word of mouth and it's amazing to see how it's
grown."

   What started with that white 1963 Chevrolet Impala convertible has grown to
what he calls a "priceless" personal collection of 50 vintage cars, 40 of them
Cadillacs -- a far cry from the Tonka trucks he played with as a toddler.

   "It's fun to take something that you're really passionate about and to do
something good with it and create fun for others. It's a win-win situation for
everyone," he said.

   In addition to his automobile stash, Plunkett said, he's the holder of
several records, including the "largest Corvette gathering (in a) pole tent and
one-day classic car show in Canada."

   If that's not enough to brag about, some of his cars once were owned by the
likes of Johnny Cash, Van Johnson and Bob Hope.

   He attributes his creation in 1997 of the Plunkett Foundation -- to raise
grant money to support medical research -- to the love and respect he has for
his parents.

   His father was Earl Plunkett, who did extensive work at University Hospital
and was chief of gynecology at Toronto General. Earl Plunkett made his fortune
through the work for which he's best known -- development of the birth control
pill.

   This year's Cruize-in will start with special vehicle exhibits and celebrity
performances by '50s-era crooners Frankie Avalon, Bobby Rydell and Fabian and,
from the '60s, Peter Noone, lead singer for the British band Herman's Hermits.

   Along with nostalgic performances, renowned car customizer George Barris will
play host to the event's first-ever classic auction.

   Auction co-ordinator Val LaVoie said the auction will allow rookie car lovers
and dedicated collectors access to prized classic cars.

   One of the vehicles is said to be the rarest Corvette, a 1971 Chevrolet LS-6.

   Last year, Plunkett's event raised $110,000 as 15,000 people swooned over his
automotive gems.

   He hopes this year's event will draw more than 20,000 car-lovers and raise
$150,000 for 20 charities, including Jesse's Journey, a Duchenne muscular
dystrophy charity that raises money for gene therapy.

   ---

   FLEETWOOD COUNTRY CRUIZE-IN

   Where: Plunkett Foundation estate, 9282 Elviage Dr., London.

   When: June 8 to 10.

   Tickets: June 8 cocktail event, $65, tickets available through Centennial
Hall box office at 519-672-1967; June 9 dinner, $115, is sold out; admission to
June 9 and June 10 auction is $10 at the gate; parking donation on June 9 in
addition to the $10 at the gate; children 12 and under are free with adult for
June 9 and 10.

   More information: www. fleetwoodcountrycruizein.com

GRAPHIC: photo by Ken Wightman Sun Media AMAZING GROWTH: Cadillac collector
Steve Plunkett is holding his annual Fleetwood Country Cruize-in at his west
London estate to the benefit of many local charities. It drew 15,000 people last
year and raised $110,000.

LOAD-DATE: May 24, 2007


                              79 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2007 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                             May 19, 2007 Saturday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A03

LENGTH: 583 words

HEADLINE: Mom: 'My child's life was in this syringe';
Experimental treatment could be best chance of survival for 'bubble boy'

BYLINE: Theresa Boyle, Toronto Star

BODY:

   Sixteen-month-old Parker DesLauriers' best chance for survival came yesterday
in the form of a huge syringe containing a cloudy substance.

   At a hospital in Milan, the contents of this syringe were slowly injected
into a central line in his chest over the course of 15 minutes. All the while,
Parker's mother, Tracy, kept her eyes on the needle, wishing it to make her son
better.

   "Oh my gosh, I was so nervous. Until those cells were in his body, I couldn't
relax," she said in a telephone interview from her hotel.

   She and her husband, Kevin, have taken Parker to Italy for experimental gene
therapy. The Ajax boy was born with a severely compromised immune system. He has
a rare disease, ADA-deficient severe combined immunodeficiency, passed down from
parents who each carry a copy of a defective gene.

   The condition, known as "boy in the bubble" disease, is so rare that the
Hospital for Sick Children has treated only 15 patients in the past two decades.

   Without treatment, Parker would probably die before age 2. He has thrived
until now because of an enzyme replacement therapy, but its effects would wear
off in about a year.

   All hope for the toddler rests on a gene therapy trial being conducted in
Milan by Dr. Alessandro Aiuti. This treatment is not available in Canada. Since
the family arrived in Milan two months ago, Parker has undergone a battery of
tests.

   A week ago he underwent a bone marrow harvest. Stem cells were removed and
genetically altered. He also got a mild chemotherapy dose to prepare him for
yesterday's re-injection.

   When Parker awoke yesterday, he knew a special day awaited - almost like a
birthday. "We told him, 'It's your special cell day.' We were singing cell day
songs all day," his mother laughed.

   A happy toddler, Parker played with an empty box as a nurse gave him the
vital injection from a large syringe. As the minutes ticked by, DesLauriers held
Parker's hand and found herself having a quiet conversation with the needle.

   "I keep talking to those cells and telling them to do their job. My child's
life was in this syringe," she said.

   They won't know for at least a month, when Parker goes for a bone aspiration,
if the gene therapy is working. If all goes well, the family could be back in
Canada by September.

   "Now we just wait," DesLauriers said.

   So far this experimental gene therapy has been tried on just six children in
the world, with limited but hopeful success.

   Parker has spent much of his young life in isolation at the Hospital for Sick
Children or at his home, which must be kept sterile and free of visitors to
minimize germ exposure. In Italy, he must stay in hospital isolation for at
least a month before joining his parents in a hotel, where he'll be isolated
indoors. He's not supposed to be around other children for a year.

   Aside from being the first Canadian to undergo such gene therapy, the Milan
trip has seen other firsts for Parker.

   He learned to stand for the first time without using furniture for support.
He took his first steps. And he even went on a swing for the first time.

   "We would wait until there was no one at the park and we'd bring our Lysol
wipes and wipe it all down," DesLauriers said. Parker smiled the whole time.

   Italian fundraising has covered the gene therapy and the family's
accommodation while Air Canada paid for the flights. But the ordeal has been
financially trying for the two teachers.

   They have a blog documenting Parker's journey that also provides information
on making donations: www.scidada.blogspot.com.

GRAPHIC:  16-month-old Parker DesLauriers is in Italy getting experimental gene
therapy.

LOAD-DATE: May 19, 2007


                              81 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2007 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                             March 12, 2007 Monday

SECTION: GTA; Pg. D01

LENGTH: 577 words

HEADLINE: Boy's best chance for life is in Milan Gene therapy trials set in
Italy

BYLINE: Tanya Talaga, Toronto Star

BODY:

   After an agonizing wait, 14-month-old Parker DesLauriers and his parents are
heading off to Italy today so the infant can begin potentially life-saving,
experimental gene therapy.

   Parker suffers from a rare disease called ADA-deficient severe combined
immunodeficiency (SCID), an illness he inherited from his parents, who both
carried a copy of a defective gene.

   "I started packing today and it's crazy," Parker's elated mother Tracy told
the Toronto Star last week. "I've got five suitcases. We are going from a
nice-sized home to a tiny hotel room."

   The condition, also known as "boy in the bubble" disease after a famous case
in the 1970s, is so rare that the Hospital for Sick Children has only treated 15
patients in the past two decades.

   Parker spent most of his first five months of life at Sick Kids - isolated
from others for fear he would catch an infection his body is unable to fight
off. He was finally allowed to go home to Ajax last June while he is on ADA
replacement therapy and his immune system is propped up.

   Air Canada has donated the DesLauriers' flights to Milan and is making every
effort to ensure the family arrives safely, including whisking them through the
airport check-in and security lines. "It's perfect," she says. "Five minutes
before we get to the airport, we'll call them and they'll check us in and take
us to the lounge."

   Air Canada will also assist when the family lands in Frankfurt,in order to
catch their connecting flight to Milan. "I'll bring my little Lysol wipes and
wipe down his seat," said Tracy, who always makes sure Parker is in the cleanest
environment possible.

   The disease means his body is missing the enzyme adenosine deaminase (ADA).
Without this enzyme, which removes toxins from the body, toxins accumulate in
the blood and organs and can lead to critical infection.

   He currently gets ADA through enzyme injection therapy at Sick Kids twice a
week and he's thriving.

   But few children survive more than three years on this therapy, known as
PEG-ADA.

   The experimental gene therapy in Milan is Parker's best hope at long-term
survival. The family will be in Milan for six months. There, Italian doctors,
led by Dr. Alessandro Aiuti, will remove stem cells from his bone marrow and
introduce a normal version of the ADA gene. These will be reinjected and it is
hoped they will migrate to the bone marrow and begin making ADA.

   Scientists believe gene therapy holds much promise for the future. A cell's
genetic material is stored on chromosomes in the nucleus on long molecules of
deoxyribonucleic acid or DNA, which contain genes that dictate an organism's
characteristics.

   "Parker has been doing so well, I don't even think about this not working,"
said Tracy of her son, who weighs 26.5 pounds.

   After they arrive, Parker will go through one month of tests. Then he'll be
given chemotherapy and placed in isolation. After a period of time, the gene
therapy treatment will begin.

   There are 16 children participating in the clinical trial. Since this is a
trial, the family doesn't have to pay for the medical treatment.

   But both Tracy and her husband Kevin have taken leave from their teaching
jobs to be with their son full-time, so money will be tight.

   The family is looking forward to a big homecoming in six months. "Our arrival
home will be more fun than the departure," she said. "My mom has been crying for
two weeks."

   To find out more information on Parker and the family's journey, visit
www.scidada.blogspot.com

GRAPHIC:  Charla Jones toronto star Parker DesLauriers, who suffers from a rare
immune disorder known as 'boy in the bubble' disease, plays with his parents,
Kevin and Tracy, at their Ajax home. The family leaves for Milan, Italy today,
where the 14-month-old will be one of 16 children participating in a clinical
trial of an experimental, but potentially life-saving gene therapy.

LOAD-DATE: March 12, 2007


                              82 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2007 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                             March 12, 2007 Monday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A01

HEADLINE: Parker goes to Italy for gene therapy trials

GRAPHIC:  Charla Jones toronto star Parker DesLauriers, seen with mom Tracy, is
off to Milan today with his parents to take part in potentially life-saving, but
experimental, gene therapy trials. The 14-month-old Ajax boy was born with a
rare immune disorder, ADA-deficient severe combined immunodeficiency disease,
also known as "boy in the bubble" disease. See story, D1

LOAD-DATE: March 12, 2007


                              84 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2007 Sun Media Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved
                          London Free Press (Ontario)

                            February 23, 2007 Friday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFESTYLES; Pg. C10

LENGTH: 465 words

HEADLINE: Cat eyes used to help fight blindness;
Silicon chips placed in partially blind felines may help repair diseased retinas
in people.

BYLINE: BY AP

DATELINE: COLUMBIA, MO.

BODY:

   Gingersnap, a four-year-old Abyssinian, rolled lazily on the examining table
while Dr. Kristina Narfstrom rubbed the cat's cinnamon-coloured head.

   Using a special viewer, Narfstrom peered deep into the cat's eyes to measure
her losing battle with a disorder slowly killing her retinas, the thin film at
the back of the eyeball that makes sight possible.

   "By the time she's five, she'll probably be blind," said Narfstrom, a
veterinary ophthalmologist at the University of Missouri-Columbia.

   Gingersnap's condition is similar to retinitis pigmentosa, an incurable
genetic disease in humans that strikes one out of every 3,500 Americans and
often causes blindness. Narfstrom, who discovered the feline version of the
disease among Abyssinians in her native Sweden, is implanting special silicon
chips in partially blind cats in a bid to help replace or possibly repair
diseased retinas in people.

   Retinitis pigmentosa attacks the eye's photoreceptor cells, also called rods
and cones, that register light and colour.

   The chips, which provide their own energy, have shown encouraging results in
clinical human trials, in cases improving sight in people with retinitis
pigmentosa or at least slowing the disease's development. Narfstrom said chips
have been implanted in 30 people.

   Narfstrom's cats will help researchers fine-tune the chips' performance and
train physicians on surgical techniques to implant the devices, because the
structure of cat eyes is similar to human eyes.

   The two-millimetre-wide chips, developed by Optobionics Corp. of Naperville,
Ill., are surgically implanted in the back of the eye. Each chip's surface is
covered with 5,000 microphotodiodes that react to light, sending electric
signals along the eye's optic nerve to the brain.

   "We're placing it right where the photoreceptors are and if they're lacking,
this is supposed to replace what they're doing," she said. "At this point, it's
impulses of light they're seeing (as opposed to images), but the aim of the
research is to get more information out of the chip."

   Besides helping slow the advance of the disease, studies suggest that the
electric currents generated by the chips may be regenerating damaged
photoreceptors surrounding the implants.

   Narfstrom said she should know in about two years whether the implants are
actually encouraging retinal cells in her cats to grow.

   The Optobionics chip is just one of many research paths now swarming with
scientists looking for ways to protect and restore sight.

   Besides genetic therapy, which is seen as a good tool to fight hereditary
disorders, researchers are also looking to use stem cells to rebuild damaged
retinal cells. Others are looking for substances that could trick healthy
retinal cells surrounding the photoreceptors to take over for their diseased
counterparts.

GRAPHIC: photo by AP PREPARES: Dr. Kristina Narfstrom prepares to look at the
eyes of Gingersnap, a four-year-old Abyssinian. Narfstrom, who discovered the
feline version of retinitis pigmentosa among Abyssinians, is implanting special
silicon chips in partially blind cats in a bid to help replace or possibly
regenerate diseased retinas in humans.

LOAD-DATE: February 23, 2007


                              87 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2007 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                           February 3, 2007 Saturday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A24

LENGTH: 361 words

HEADLINE: Acclaimed scientist jailed for abusing girl, 10;
Judge criticizes 'intellectual arrogance' of famous geneticist

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES

BODY:

   A world-renowned geneticist was jailed yesterday for 14 years for molesting
an employee's daughter who took martial arts classes at his home.

   Many people, including a Nobel Prize winner, wrote letters in support of
William French Anderson, Time magazine's runner-up for Man of the Year in 1995.

   But Judge Michael Pastor said Anderson caused "incalculable" emotional damage
to a victim he described as an insecure and trusting immigrant.

   Prosecutors said Anderson molested her from 1997 - when she was 10 - to 2001.
"Because of intellectual arrogance, he persisted and he got away with as much as
he could," the judge said.

   Anderson, 70, was convicted in July of child molestation. Anderson has been
called the "father of gene therapy" for his work on a promising but
controversial experimental medical treatment that involves injecting healthy
genes into sick patients. He claimed to be the first person to treat a patient
successfully with the therapy in 1990, though the claim has been disputed.

   Anderson watched intently as his victim, now 19, read a statement before he
was sentenced.

   "Roughly three years ago, I wanted to kill myself," she said.

   "I couldn't live with all the pain ... He maliciously destroyed my world to
fulfill his own sick pleasures."

   The judge also ordered Anderson to pay her family about $52,000 (U.S.) in
restitution for past therapy and to cover the cost of any future treatment. He
also imposed fines and fees of about $16,000.

   Defence lawyers had argued Anderson was a friendly mentor to the girl and was
being smeared by her mother, who wanted to assume Anderson's position as
director of the Gene Therapies Laboratories at the University of Southern
California's Keck School of Medicine.

   In emails and a tape-recorded conversation played for jurors during the
trial, the girl angrily confronted Anderson, who told her: "I just did it, just
something in me was just evil."

   In court, Anderson testified he thought the confrontation was about emotional
abuse he had inflicted on her, as he pressured her to do well in school.

   "If you cause somebody to crash, flunk out, that's just evil," he said.

   Anderson resigned from the university in September.

LOAD-DATE: February 3, 2007


                              88 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2006 Sun Media Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved
                          London Free Press (Ontario)

                           December 30, 2006 Saturday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: ENTERTAINMENT; Pg. C8

LENGTH: 702 words

HEADLINE: No Jurassic Park

BYLINE: BY MATT CRENSON, AP

BODY:

   NEXT

   By Michael Crichton

   HarperCollins, $32.95

   Give Michael Crichton a millimetre and he'll take a mile.

   That's how it works with America's favourite science fictionalizer -- show
him a scientific advance that's as mystifying as the metric system and in no
time he'll conjure up a crowd-pleasing swashbuckler replete with time-travelling
archeologists, killer nanomachines or reconstituted dinosaurs.

   This time it's biotechnology under Crichton's lens. In Next, he depicts a
world where doctors test high-risk gene therapies on desperately ill patients,
human body parts can be a marketable commodity and scientists have immense
powers to create new forms of life.

   Nothing remarkable about that. It pretty much describes the current
biotechnological state of affairs. But apply the Crichton treatment and suddenly
suburban parents are raising human-chimpanzee hybrids along with their natural
children, who are doing their arithmetic homework with the help of pet parrots
that are so smart they can add, subtract and reveal marital infidelity.

   Meanwhile, biotechnology companies patent rare genes and then send bounty
hunters to collect tissue samples from the people who carry them. Global
corporations genetically engineer fish and turtles to bear their corporate
logos. Lab workers accidentally infect their relatives with genetically modified
viruses that cause them to age decades in a matter of weeks.

   Clearly, Crichton means to warn us biotechnology is woefully unregulated, its
power unappreciated by politicians and the general public. Biotechnology
companies put profit above public health by charging exorbitant licensing fees
for their patented discoveries, he charges, and testing dangerous new therapies
on patients without informing them of the risks.

   The media is to blame as well. Crichton intersperses the narrative with
fictional news stories, based on real ones from recent years, that glibly
illustrate the fourth estate's propensity for hype, gullibility and inaccuracy.

   Unfortunately, this lesson isn't as entertaining as some that Crichton has
offered in the past. In Jurassic Park, he pushed the science just past
credibility to create a gripping thriller set in a fantasy world so rich that
anyone with an ounce of imagination would gladly suspend disbelief for the
privilege of visiting.

   But Next never quite makes that leap into the fantastic. Even when it
ventures into territory where science has not yet and almost certainly will
never tread, the book just doesn't grab the imagination the way those dinosaurs
did. It just flits among various unrelated characters and plotlines, only some
of which eventually come together.

   Much of the book revolves around BioGen, a troubled California biotech
company that is having problems developing a "maturity" gene therapy that is
supposed to cure irresponsible behaviour and drug addiction. The company also
owns a line of cells derived from a man whose biochemistry allowed him to beat
cancer. But he doesn't want to share.

   Then there's the menagerie; you might as well be reading Doctor Doolittle for
all the talking animals. We meet an orangutan in the Sumatran jungle that curses
at tourists in French and Dutch, though nobody knows where it came from or how
it acquired such a colourful vocabulary.

   The parrot comes from a French laboratory, where it has been injected with
human genes that enable it not just to mimic language, but to speak it. The bird
clearly must have received a piece of Y-chromosome, because it has the same
habit of constantly quoting popular songs and movies that is so distressingly
common among certain males of the human species.

   But the real spectacle is the "humanzee," a human-chimp hybrid created
illicitly by a scientist in a federal laboratory. The humanzee doesn't speak as
fluently as the parrot, but its instinctual primate social behaviours make it
the perfect addition to a human family.

   Next is bound to make a great movie. You can't go wrong with sinister
corporate misdeeds, killer viruses, bounty hunters and talking animals. But with
so many confusing plot elements Crichton's latest book is nearly as hard to
follow as the complicated, fast-moving and ethically charged scientific field on
which it is based.

GRAPHIC: 2 photos 1. photo of MICHAEL CRICHTON His biotech thriller, Next,
suffers from confusing, hard-to-follow plot elements -- but it will probably
make a terrific movie.

LOAD-DATE: December 30, 2006


                              93 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2006 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                            November 7, 2006 Tuesday

SECTION: GTA; Pg. E08

LENGTH: 579 words

HEADLINE: Parents agonize as trip delayed

BYLINE: Tanya Talaga, Toronto Star

BODY:

   Nine-month-old Parker DesLauriers' trip to Italy for life-saving gene therapy
has been delayed until January.

   "We want to go as soon as we can," his mother, Tracy DesLauriers, said in an
interview last week at the Hospital for Sick Children.

   Right now would be the optimal time since he is the picture of health. But
DesLauriers is resigned to the wait, even if it means enduring the cold and flu
season, which could be devastating for her only child.

   "Everything with Parker seems to happen for a reason," his mother said.

   DesLauriers inherited a rare disease, called ADA-deficient severe combined
immunodeficiency (SCID), from his parents, who both carried a copy of a
defective gene.

   Parker's illness, also known as boy-in-the-bubble disease because patients
have to be isolated, is so rare that Sick Kids has treated only 15 patients with
it in the past two decades.

   The baby spent most of his first five months at the downtown Toronto
hospital, but was allowed to go home to Ajax in June.

   Tracy and her husband Kevin were hoping to take him to Milan for experimental
gene therapy in September, but the clinical trial has been delayed.

   Parker travels to the hospital twice a week to get an injection of an enzyme
that his body can't make. Without the adenosine deaminase (ADA), he is unable to
filter out toxins that would kill off his immune system and eventually attack
his organs. The injections work for only about two to three years.

   When Parker goes to the hospital, Tracy puts him in his stroller and fastens
a clear plastic weather guard over it to protect him from germs.

   To look at the baby, you would never guess the smiling, robust boy is
seriously ill and must spend most of his days inside the house and out of
contact with the general public.

   A simple cold could jeopardize his health. He's thriving now because of the
enzyme injection he receives at the hospital, but the shot he receives in his
thigh isn't a cure.

   In order to help Parker, Italian doctors, led by Dr. Alessandro Aiuti, will
remove stem cells from his bone marrow and introduce a normal version of the ADA
gene. These will be reinjected and it is hoped they will migrate to the bone
marrow and begin making ADA.

   A cell's genetic material is stored on chromosomes in the nucleus on long
molecules of deoxyribonucleic acid or DNA, which contain our genes. The genes
dictate an organism's characteristics.

   Dr. Roderick McInnes, scientific director for the Institute of Genetics at
the Canadian Institutes of Health Research, said gene therapy holds much promise
for the future. So far, the one place it appears to be working well is in the
treatment of ADA-deficient SCID patients.

   "The Italian team are amongst the world's best gene therapists," he said.

   Not one of the handful of children treated by the Italian team seems to have
any side effects. "It appears to be a safe 'cure,'" said McInnes. Since this is
a new therapy and the team is dealing with children, no one quite knows if the
treatment will last forever or for only five or 10 years. Gene therapy for SCID
is also being done in England and Japan, noted Kevin DesLauriers.

   "We were kind of bummed out when they told us we weren't going until
January," he said. "But we can now have Christmas at home, perhaps his first
birthday here."

   Tracy agreed. "When you go through something like this, you learn not to
question as much," she said. They've learned to enjoy every moment they have
with their son. "We just have to try and keep him healthy."

GRAPHIC:  Ron Bull toronto star Nine-month-old Parker beams as his mother, Tracy
DesLauriers, keeps him smiling in his stroller, covered with a plastic shield to
keep him free from germs, especially in the flu and cold season.

LOAD-DATE: November 7, 2006


                              96 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2006 Sun Media Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved
                          London Free Press (Ontario)

                           October 25, 2006 Wednesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFESTYLE; Pg. C9

LENGTH: 256 words

HEADLINE: Biologist enlisted to help police Pandora's box he helped create

BYLINE: BY MEGAN OGILVIE, CP

DATELINE: TORONTO

BODY:

   When, in 2004, Ronald Evans discovered a way to make mice run farther and
longer than they ever had, he didn't understand what he had unleashed on the
world of sport.

   The molecular biologist's intent was to help people with metabolic disease,
such as obesity and diabetes. But he opened up the possibility of a drug that
could be abused by athletes to push the limits of human endurance.

   The next step is to put his research into a pill and the renowned professor
at the Salk Institute for Biological Studies in La Jolla, Calif., has been hired
by the Montreal-based World Anti-Doping Agency to help police the Pandora's box
he helped make.

   "In our society, if you are a half step behind, you are not second, you are a
loser," he said. "If they (athletes) can take something that will let them win,
they will do it. I think athletes have shown us that."

   Physicists have had to deal with the distinction between atomic power and the
atomic bomb, said Rod McInnes, scientific director of the Institute of Genetics
at the Canadian Institutes of Health Research. "There's often a fine line
between responsible research and putting (it) toward inappropriate ends."

   But these types of ethical questions are relatively new in medical science,
he said, only appearing after the arrival of gene therapy -- that is, with the
prospect of tinkering with human genes.

   "And one example is in the world of highly competitive athletics, where there
are strong forces to push an individual in this direction, even though society
at large would find it repugnant."

LOAD-DATE: October 25, 2006


                              97 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2006 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                            October 24, 2006 Tuesday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 876 words

HEADLINE: Keeping a tight lid on Pandora's box

BYLINE: Megan Ogilvie, Toronto Star

BODY:

   When Ronald Evans discovered a way to make mice run farther and longer than
they ever had before, he didn't understand what he had unleashed on the world of
sport.

   The molecular biologist's intent was to help people with metabolic disease,
such as obesity and diabetes. But he opened up the possibility of a drug that
could be abused by athletes to push the limits of human endurance.

   The next step is to put his research into a pill, and now the renowned
professor at the Salk Institute for Biological Studies in La Jolla, Calif., has
been commissioned by the World Anti-Doping Agency to help police the Pandora's
box he helped make.

   After the frenzied media coverage of his "marathon mice," Evans can see why
some athletes may look to gene science to succeed in the sports arena.

   "In our society, if you are a half step behind, you are not second, you are a
loser," he says from his California office. "If they (athletes) can take
something that will let them win, they will do it. I think athletes have shown
us that."

   One of six winners of this year's $30,000 Gairdner Awards in medical science,
Evans is giving a public lecture tonight, entitled Winning and Losing:
Engineering the genome to enhance athletic performance, at the Medical and
Related Sciences Centre in Toronto.

   The public lecture precedes the awards dinner, which takes place on Thursday.

   Founded in 1957 by Toronto businessman James Gairdner, the international
awards recognize five scientists each year for their outstanding research, and
65 Gairdner winners have gone on to win the illustrious Nobel Prize.

   Other scientists have found themselves in similar ethical dilemmas to Evans's
after their scientific investigations, though intended to serve the public good,
were used for nefarious purposes. Physicists, for example, had to deal with the
distinction between atomic power and the atomic bomb, says Rod McInnes,
scientific director of the Institute of Genetics at the Canadian Institutes of
Health Research.

   "There's often a fine line between responsible research and putting (it)
toward inappropriate ends," he says.

   But these types of ethical questions are relatively new in medical science,
he says, only appearing after the arrival of gene therapy - that is, with the
prospect of tinkering with human genes.

   "And one example is in the world of highly competitive athletics, where there
are strong forces to push an individual in this direction, even though society
at large would find it repugnant."

   Evans, who has been at the forefront of molecular biology for two decades,
unveiled his marathon mice in 2004.

   The scientist engineered the animals' genome to "switch on" a gene to burn
calories more efficiently. The researchers soon noticed that it increased
quality of exercise. The work showed, for the first time, that it was possible
to increase or alter endurance without traditional athletic training.

   Evans is now taking his research one step further, this time with his eyes
open to its unintended consequences.

   He's investigating whether drugs can control the molecular switches. One day,
he says, people with metabolic syndrome - a cluster of risk factors that include
high blood pressure, high cholesterol and abdominal obesity - could pop a pill
to increase the quality of their exercise, perhaps protecting them from type 2
diabetes and heart disease.

   "The bad part is that if you develop a pill that can increase exercise to
benefit the body, healthy people might want to take it, specifically to improve
athletic performance," he says with a sigh. "There's a long history of athletes
being willing to take drugs to improve performance."

   Because his research has the potential to leap from the lab to the sports
stadium, the World Anti-Doping Agency, or WADA, has asked Evans to devise a test
to catch athletes who use his techniques to gene dope.

   Athletes don't know how to use his findings to improve endurance, but Evans
says they will figure it out as he continues to publish the results of his
experiments. But he plans to be one step ahead and provide WADA with a test that
can detect gene doping, which the agency banned in 2003.

   "Since we created the potential problem, we kind of know what the potential
answer would be."

   Tim Caulfield, who holds the title of Canada research chair in health law and
policy at the University of Alberta, says scientists continually grapple with
how to deal with the unintended use of new therapies and technologies.

   "Scientists, especially those doing genetic and stem cell research, have
become sensitive to the broad social ramifications of their research," he says.
"They haven't stopped their research, but work with policy-makers and the
ethical and legal community to make sure it can integrate into society."

   Caulfield says that elite athletes, who are often highly motivated risk
takers, may well be the first population to try various gene therapies to get an
edge in sport.

   "Virtually all doping techniques were developed for valid medical use," he
says. "It's always going to be a challenge to keep ahead of athletes."

   The Gairdner public lecture takes place tonight at 7: 30 p.m. at the MaRS
Centre, 101 College St. Admission is free. Call 416-596-6850 to reserve a seat.
Go to gairdner.org on the Internet for further information.

LOAD-DATE: October 24, 2006


                              104 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2006 Sun Media Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved
                          London Free Press (Ontario)

                            September 1, 2006 Friday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFESTYLE; Pg. C8

LENGTH: 674 words

HEADLINE: CANCER GENE THERAPY SCORES KNOCKOUT

BYLINE: BY SHERYL UBELACKER, CP

DATELINE: TORONTO

BODY:

   U.S. researchers have genetically engineered immune cells in the blood,
transforming them into tumour fighters that eliminated melanoma in two men with
an advanced stage of the often deadly disease.

   While 15 other patients with melanoma were not helped by the modified T-cell
treatment, its success in the two who responded was hailed yesterday as a
significant step forward in the field of gene therapy for cancer.

   Principal researcher Dr. Steven Rosenberg of the National Cancer Institute
said his research team hopes to expand clinical trials of the gene therapy for
patients with other types of advanced malignancies, including breast and colon
cancer.

   "It represents the first time that we've been able to do gene therapy . . .
and treat cancer patients, to genetically engineer human cells and cause cancer
regression," Rosenberg, the NCI's head of surgery, said yesterday from
Bethesda., Md. "So we're very enthusiastic about it as a new approach."

   While the therapy "had no impact" on the other 15, who have since died,
Rosenberg said his team has found a way to strengthen the genetically engineered
T-cells in the hope of improving the success rate among other patients with
advanced melanoma.

   "We have receptors, that is genes, that are 10 to 100 times more powerful
than the ones we used just a couple of years ago, so I have every expectation
that we're going to be able to improve upon this dramatically."

   Brad Nelson, director of the B.C. Cancer Agency's Deeley Research Centre in
Victoria, said that although the clinical trial was small, its results represent
"a really important step forward."

   "Where this is an advance is it might allow an off-the-shelf approach . . .
and, for any patient, you could take a blood sample from them and genetically
engineer any old T-cell in their blood sample -- and it could now become a
tumour killer," said Nelson, who specializes in adaptive T-cell therapy.

   "This will be a boost for the gene therapy field, which has had some
setbacks."

   Rosenberg's lab took normal T-cells that don't recognize cancer from the
melanoma patients, who had run out of treatment options. The researchers altered
the T-cells so a receptor protein carried on their surface would recognize
molecules called antigens on the tumour cells.

   These newly armed T-cells were grown in the lab, then injected into the
patient's bloodstream, much like a transfusion.

   In 15 of the 17 patients who received the therapy, the fortified T-cells
remained in the body, but grew at low levels over a few months. The 15
eventually succumbed to melanoma.

   Only two saw their cancer disappear. They are currently disease-free and
their super-T-cell levels remain high two years after treatment.

   "I'm cured for now," said one of the two, Mark Origer, 53, of Watertown,
Wis., who saw his tumours start to shrink just a month after his December 2004
treatment. A year ago, only a small cancerous spot on his liver remained, which
surgeons later removed. A checkup from NCI doctors this week confirmed Origer is
still cancer-free.

   "I know how fortunate I am to have gone through this and responded to this,"
he said. "Not everybody's that lucky."

   Still, the researchers admit there's no guarantee that the cancer won't come
back. An estimated 4,500 Canadians will be diagnosed this year with malignant
melanoma, and almost 900 will die, says the Canadian Cancer Society.

   Despite optimism about the experimental treatment's promise, Nelson cautioned
that safety of gene therapy remains a concern, since it is T-cells that go awry
in autoimmune diseases such as Type 1 diabetes, in which they attack healthy
insulin- producing cells in the pancreas.

   Nelson said Rosenberg's paper, published yesterday in the journal Science,
"doesn't talk much about autoimmunity."

   "Those T-cells will now become activated by the tumour, but they still have
their other receptors that they were born with," he said. "So now that they're
activated . . . what is stopping that T-cell from going into the pancreas, in
diabetes for instance, and starting to destroy the pancreas?"

GRAPHIC: photo by AP CANCER FREE: Mark Origer, 53, of Watertown, Wis., stands
with his daughter Katie at her wedding last fall, an event he had feared he
wouldn't live to see. Origer had an experimental gene therapy for his end-stage
mela-noma in December 2004 and now appears disease-free.

LOAD-DATE: September 1, 2006


                              105 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2006 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                            September 1, 2006 Friday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A02

LENGTH: 565 words

HEADLINE: U.S. researchers tout cancer success

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   Government scientists turned regular blood cells into tumour attackers that
wiped out all signs of cancer in two men with advanced melanoma. The striking
finding, unveiled yesterday, marks an important step in the quest for gene
therapy for cancer.

   But the genetically altered cells didn't help 15 other melanoma victims. So
scientists are trying to strengthen the shots. Still, the National Cancer
Institute called its experiment the first real success in cancer gene therapy -
because it fought cancer's worst stage, when it has spread through the body,
unlike earlier attempts that targeted single tumours. And the government hopes
to soon begin testing the gene therapy in small numbers of patients dying from
more common cancers, such as advanced breast or colon cancer. The hope is that
one day, such treatment might provide long-lasting tumour suppression.

   "It's not like chemotherapy or radiation, whereas soon as you're done, you're
done," said lead researcher Dr. Steven Rosenberg, NCI surgery chief. "We're
giving living cells which continue to grow and function in the body."

   The first two successful patients appear melanoma-free almost two years after
infusions of tumour fighters made from their own blood. Doctors can't predict
how the men will fare long-term. Melanoma, the most aggressive skin cancer and
killer of almost 9,000 North Americans a year, is notorious for returning years
after patients think they've subdued it.

   "I'm cured for now," is how a grateful Mark Origer, 53, of Wisconsin, put it
after a checkup from NCI doctors this week. "I know how fortunate I am to have
gone through this and responded to this. Not everybody's that lucky."

   Cancer specialists praised the work, published yesterday by the journal
Science, but warned that years of additional research are needed.

   "Clearly this is a first step," cautioned Dr. Len Lichtenfeld of the American
Cancer Society. "We have to be very cautious about not raising hopes too much,"
but "it certainly is a proof of concept that this approach will work."

   NCI's Rosenberg has long led a tantalizing research field: how to harness the
body's immune system to fight cancer. White blood cells called T-lymphocytes
hunt down germs and other foreign tissue. But cancerous cells look a lot like
healthy cells, making it hard for those T-cells to spot a problem.

   By 2002, Rosenberg had made a breakthrough. He found small numbers of
cancer-fighting T-cells inside some patients with advanced melanoma. He
literally pulled those cells out of their blood, and grew billions more of them
in laboratory dishes, enough to have a chance at overwhelming a tumour when
they're pumped back into patients. About half significantly improve after this
"cell-transfer therapy."

   But few melanoma patients make enough cancer-fighting T-cells naturally for
scientists to spot in their bloodstream, and T-cells that attack other cancers
are virtually impossible to find. So Rosenberg and colleagues took normal
lymphocytes - that don't recognize cancer - out of 17 patients with advanced
melanoma who'd exhausted treatment options. They infected those cells with a
virus carrying genes that create T-cell receptors, essentially homing devices
for melanoma.

   In 15 of 17 patients who tried it, the newly armed cells took root growing at
low levels for a few months. Only two, including Origer, saw their tumours
gradually fade away, the study found.

LOAD-DATE: September 1, 2006


                              107 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2006 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                            August 31, 2006 Thursday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 690 words

HEADLINE: Making babies for sport

BYLINE: Randy Starkman, Toronto Star

BODY:

   It looms as the ultimate "repair kit" for elite athletes - stem cells
harvested from their newborn's umbilical cord used to treat career-threatening
injuries.

   The Sunday Times reported recently that at least five professional soccer
players in England have had stem cells from the blood of their children's
umbilical cords frozen. It's being done to protect their progeny in the event of
future illness, but is also seen by some of the athletes as a potential aid to
fix their own damaged cartilage and ligaments in the future.

   One unidentified Premier League player told the British newspaper: "As a
footballer, if you're prone to injury it can mean the end of your career, so
having your stem cells - a repair kit, if you like - on hand makes sense."

   Paul Melia, president and CEO of the Canadian Centre for Ethics in Sport,
said the ethical implications are disturbing.

   "Obviously, we're going to be concerned if people start having children to
have spare parts on hand, shall we say, if things go wrong," Melia said.

   "Setting that concern aside, I don't know if it would be unethical if it was
stored for the child and was also used by the parents.

   "From a doping perspective, there's the use of stored materials for
therapeutic repair versus genetic enhancement. Gene therapy that brings things
to a normal state is fine. But what happens when that genetic therapy is being
used to enhance human capacity, say to create more fast-twist muscle fibre in a
sprinter? That would be considered a doping method versus a repair."

   There are no reported cases of athletes in Canada storing their newborns'
stem cells with a similar purpose in mind.

   "I can't say I've ever heard of it," said Fraser Hay of Lifebank, a company
based in Burnaby, B.C., that charges $1,075 for the initial storage of stem
cells and an annual fee of $125.

   Stem cells have the ability to replicate, so they can be used to regenerate
damaged organs and tissue, and injury or disease could be reversed. But there is
no guarantee a child's stem cells would be a donor match for a parent.

   U.S. President George W. Bush declared five years ago that no federal funding
could be used for embryonic stem-cell research. Last month, he vetoed a bill
that would have allowed such research. The subject remains highly controversial.

   "This bill would support the taking of innocent human life in the hope of
finding medical benefits for others. It crosses a moral boundary that our
society needs to respect, so I vetoed it," Bush said at a White House event to
mark the veto.

   Dr. Darrell Ogilvie-Harris, one of Canada's top orthopedic surgeons, said he
believes the stem cells from umbilical cords could be ready for use in repairing
ligaments and cartilage within the decade.

   "From a purely scientific point of view, there's no question that technology
offers the brightest possible potential for human regeneration in the future,"
said Ogilvie-Harris, who formerly worked with the Toronto Maple Leafs.

   But Dr. Renn Crichlow, a former world champion kayaker for Canada who works
as an orthopedic surgeon in Indianapolis, said he thinks the science is further
off than that, and he has major issues with the ethics of athletes using stem
cells that have been stored for their children's future health.

   "It's different when you're harvesting or you're potentially saving the stem
cells to save the child's life if they got leukemia or advanced liver disease,"
Crichlow said. "But to prolong your career in sport after you've had a potential
irrecoverable injury, that's losing sight of what sport's supposed to be about.
It's saving the kid's cord blood to produce hyper-performance."

   Dr. Doug Richards, a former Toronto Raptors physician who runs the McIntosh
sports medicine clinic at the University of Toronto, doesn't see it as an
ethical issue.

   "There's a kid who's giving 70 per cent of his liver to his father in the
hospital (in Toronto)," Richards said. "What if he could say, 'Want some stem
cells from my umbilical cord blood, we can grow you a new liver here?' Which is
preferable? Is it ethical to give his father his liver surgically but not to
have some of his umbilical cord blood?"

LOAD-DATE: August 31, 2006


                              116 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2006 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                             June 3, 2006 Saturday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A04

LENGTH: 879 words

HEADLINE: 'Bubble boy' comes home from hospital

BYLINE: elaine carey health reporter, Toronto Star

BODY:

   Tiny Parker DesLauriers has taken his first baby step toward a new life,
leaving a hospital isolation room and returning to his home in Ajax.

   Within a few short hours yesterday, he saw his parents' ecstatic smiles for
the first time, felt their skin, breathed fresh air and played in the room
that's been waiting for him for more than three months.

   With only a day's notice that Parker was being discharged from the Hospital
for Sick Children, Tracy and Kevin DesLauriers scrambled to clean every surface
in the house with Lysol wipes, rewash all his clothes, professionally clean the
car and assemble his stroller.

   The 41/2-month-old baby was born with a rare genetic disease called
ADA-deficient severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID), commonly called
boy-in-the-bubble disease, which quickly destroyed his immune system.

   Without treatment, he would probably die before age 2.

   He's thriving now because of the enzyme replacement therapy he started
receiving a few weeks ago but that will only stave off infection for the next
couple of years.

   Parker's only real hope is an experimental gene therapy treatment in Italy
that has been tried on just six children in the world with limited but hopeful
success. He's been accepted in the clinical trial and, if he continues to
thrive, the family hopes to leave for Italy in October.

   But all that was far in the future yesterday as a joyful Tracy and Kevin
brought their 14-pound, 11-ounce baby boy back to his Winnie the Pooh nursery,
full of colourful toys and sparkling furniture.

   "It's like bringing your newborn baby home excepts he's 41/2 months and he
laughs and he plays," said Tracy as she delighted in her laughing baby.

   When she took off the gown, mask, boots and rubber gloves that have separated
her from her son in his isolation room at the Hospital for Sick Children for so
long, "I started crying right away - to feel his hair and his skin," she said.
"The whole way home, he just held my hand. It's new to him - skin."

   From his car seat, Parker stared out the window all the way to Ajax. His only
view until now has been the static one outside his hospital room window.

   They pulled into the driveway and were greeted by balloons hanging outside
the front door and "Welcome Home Parker" spelled out in letters pasted to the
garage door.

   But there was no welcoming party to meet them. Parker can't be around crowds
of people unless he stays inside the plastic bubble that covers his stroller and
even then, only outside.

   Kevin's parents, who decorated the garage, stopped by briefly to welcome
Parker home - but only outside and only at a distance. His immune system is
still severely compromised and because he's had lung problems, the worst fear is
that he could contract pneumonia.

   "We have to come up with some strict rules at home," Kevin said, as he wiped
down the counter in the spotless kitchen once again. "It used to be tidy, now
it's clean."

   They've been told not to take him outside on hot, humid days or near
construction, a tough one since another home is being erected right behind
theirs.

   The young couple moved into the new house shortly after their marriage in
March 2005. When Tracy got pregnant, their lives seemed perfect.

   Neither knew that they both carried a mutation on the same gene, a
circumstance so rare that Sick Kids has treated only 15 children with the
disorder in the past 20 years.

   Six days after Parker's birth, he turned blue and a day later, he was taken
to hospital with pneumonia. A few days later, he stopped breathing and was
rushed to Sick Kids where he's lived ever since.

   Parker has a rare form of SCID, which became known as the boy-in-the-bubble
disease after a famous case in the 1970s, in which he's missing the enzyme
adenosine deaminase (ADA) that removes toxins from his body. Without it, the
toxins accumulate in his blood and organs and would lead to severe infections
and organ death.

   Right now, he's getting ADA through enzyme injection therapy. He'll continue
to get it twice a week at Sick Kids at a cost of $2,500 an injection, now
covered by OHIP. But few children survive more than three years on PEG-ADA.

   Kevin, a high school computer science teacher, searched the Internet for hope
and found Dr. Alessandro Aiuti, who is running the gene therapy trial in Milan.

   When Parker goes there, Aiuti will remove stem cells from his bone marrow,
correct the DNA in them so they contain a working ADA gene, then reinject them
in his bloodstream in the hopes his little body will begin producing its own
ADA.

   But for now, as Parker bounced and gurgled happily in the new exerciser that
was waiting in his nursery, the young couple revelled in how normal their life
had suddenly become.

   "We don't know what a normal life is," said Tracy, who has spent 12 hours
every day at the hospital. "But we can make one up," she laughed, gazing
adoringly at her baby.

   Friends have organized a benefit concert, Playing for Parker, at 8 p.m. June
16 at the Rivoli, 334 Queen St. W., to help cover the family's estimated
$150,000 travel and living costs in Italy, where they'll have to stay for six
months.

   Donations can also be made at any TD Canada Trust branch under account number
590 6267228 or electronically on Kevin's website, where he details every day of
Parker's life, www.scidada.blogspot.com.

GRAPHIC:  Charla Jones toronto star Parker DesLaurier, who was born with a
disease that destroyed his immune system, was released yesterday from hospital.
When his mom, Tracy, took off the gloves, mask and gown that separated her from
her son, "I started crying right away to feel his hair and his skin."

LOAD-DATE: June 3, 2006


                              119 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2006 Sun Media Corporation
                          London Free Press (Ontario)

                              May 23, 2006 Tuesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: CITY & REGION; Pg. B10

LENGTH: 528 words

HEADLINE: RESEARCHERS MAKE BLIND CHICKENS SEE;
THE GENE-TRANSFER BREAKTHROUGH MAY ONE DAY HELP RESTORE SIGHT IN CHILDREN.

BYLINE: BY SHERYL UBELACKER, CP

DATELINE: TORONTO

BODY:

   It's one of those questions that has baffled humans for millennia: What came
first, the chicken or the egg? For scientists seeking a way to give sight to
genetically blind chickens, it was definitely the egg.

   Researchers from the University of Florida injected healthy genes through the
eggshells of chickens with an inherited disorder that causes them to be born
blind. When the treated chicks hatched, not only could they see, but their
vision was "amazing," said neuroscientist Sue Semple-Rowland, the principal
researcher.

   More importantly, the gene-transfer raises high hopes for developing a
treatment to restore sight in children with a similar condition, called Leber
congenital amaurosis Type 1, or LCA1.

   "I firmly believe this will work," Semple-Rowland said from Gainesville, Fla.
"We're really, really close to making it possible to treat kids with various
forms of LCA with gene therapy and have them have a relatively normal life in
terms of vision."

   While there is much work still to be done, she predicted a treatment for
humans could come within just a few years.

   The breakthrough with the chickens took 20 years of painstaking work by
Semple-Rowland and her colleagues to determine what caused the birds' blindness,
to isolate the defective gene and then to figure out how to fix it.

   Her lab modified a virus to carry a normal copy of the gene that is defective
in the chickens. After boring tiny holes in the shells of fertilized eggs, they
injected a small quantity of the virus into the neural tubes of two-day-old
embryos, closed up the holes with a waxed substance and waited for them to hatch
almost three weeks later.

   Of seven chicks injected in-utero, six could see after hatching, said the
scientists, whose research is published online today in the journal Public
Library of Science-Medicine.

   "The blind animals just stand there, obviously," Semple-Rowland said. "These
animals' performance visually was spectacular. Their ability to peck targets,
very small ones, was amazing to me."

   Among the vision tests is one in which the birds are set near white paper
marked with tiny dots. The chicks headed for the paper and began pecking the
dots as if they were feed, she said. "They had great binocular vision. We know
this because their accuracy was very good."

   Still, the treatment isn't yet perfected. By four months of age, all the
chickens had lost their sight when light-receptor cells in the retina, which
allow humans and other species to see, began to degenerate.

   Semple-Rowland said that's because the injected virus appears to have
genetically repaired less than half of the light-receptor cells in the birds'
retinas, leaving the rest defective. Those defective cells eventually caused
their healthy neighbours to degrade.

   But she doesn't believe that would happen in children carrying the mutated
LCA1 gene -- who would be treated after birth, likely any time up to age five --
because a gene-transfer therapy would be injected through the eyeball to flood
the area directly underneath the retina.

   Children with LCA1 can be born blind or have some sight that is gradually
lost. LCA-related blindness affects three in every 100,000 people worldwide.

GRAPHIC: photo by CP VISIONARY DISCOVERY: Neuroscientist Sue Semple-Rowland
stands with a chicken at the University of Florida in Gainesville, Fla.
Researchers from the university injected healthy genes through the eggshells of
chickens with an inherited disorder that causes them to be born blind. When the
treated chicks hatched, their vision was "amazing," said Semple-Rowland, the
principal researcher.

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 2006


                              120 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2006 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                             May 20, 2006 Saturday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A22

LENGTH: 444 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy not a 'cure'

BODY:

   Dr. Alessandro Aiuti is reluctant to call a new gene therapy method for
treating ADA deficiency - a rare genetic immune system disorder - a cure.

   All the Italian researcher will say is that he has "successfully" treated six
people in the last five years, all of them young children, though he won't go
into detail because his clinical trial is far from complete.

   "'Cured' is a word I would use with caution because essentially it is an
experimental treatment and we need to follow up with the patients for many
years," the 40-year-old internationally known gene therapist said in a telephone
interview this week from the Raffaele Telethon Institute for Gene Therapy in
Milan.

   Aiuti acknowledged that, to the parents of those children who in all
likelihood would have died of infections without treatment, his method is
nothing short of a miracle.

   "Our great satisfaction is to see the family when they come back and express
their gratitude for essentially giving (their child) a new life."

   The study of severe combined immunodeficiency disease (SCID) began 30 years
ago, but gene therapy treatment for it is still a fledgling field. The first
successful procedure occurred in 1990 at the U.S. National Institutes of Health
clinical centre on a 4-year-old girl who had ADA deficiency, one form of SCID.
Back then, researchers changed the gene in blood cells instead of bone marrow,
which meant patients had to continue with shots of the ADA enzyme they lacked.

   A breakthrough came in 2002 when an Israeli and Italian team published study
results of an untried gene therapy method on two children that proved a complete
success. Aiuti was first author on the study, which showed key types of immune
cells could grow by not just altering genes in bone marrow but, as an additional
step, removing some of the bone marrow to make space for the engineered marrow
to expand.

   Four more children have benefited from the treatment, bringing the total to
six, he said.

   "I think the Italian group has very clear evidence they've been able to treat
the disease with the approach they're using," said Dr. Mark Kay, president of
the American Society of Gene Therapy.

   Gene therapy suffered a setback in 1999 when U.S. teenager Jesse Gelsinger,
who had a rare metabolic disorder, died when his organs failed following a
severe immune system reaction. And in 2003, clinical trials in the United States
and Europe were temporarily halted after two of 11 patients being treated in
France for another type of SCID, called X1, developed leukemia.

   Some of those trials have resumed, mainly because the therapy was beneficial
for patients who otherwise would have died of their fatal genetic illness.

GRAPHIC:  To parents, Dr. Alessandro Aiuti's gene therapy is nothing short of a
miracle.

LOAD-DATE: May 20, 2006


                              121 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2006 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                             May 20, 2006 Saturday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1229 words

HEADLINE: SAVING TORONTO'S 'BUBBLE BOY'

BYLINE: elaine carey health reporter, Toronto Star

BODY:

   In the hundreds of pictures his father has taken, four-month-old Parker
DesLauriers looks for all the world like a normal healthy baby boy, laughing,
gurgling and rolling over.

   But ever since he was a few weeks old, the firstborn son of Ajax residents
Kevin and Tracy DesLauriers has been living in an isolation room at the Hospital
for Sick Children. He can't see his mother's smile or feel his father's skin.
His parents must wear sterile booties, hairnets, masks, gloves and gowns when
they enter Parker's room, where the air is filtered 500 times an hour.

   Parker inherited a rare genetic disease called ADA-deficient severe combined
immunodeficiency (SCID), or boy-in-the-bubble disease, which left him with no
immune system. Without treatment, he would die before he turned 2. Even the
standard enzyme replacement therapy can stave off infections only until he is 2
or 3.

   Parker's parents struggled over the decision to take him to a clinic in Italy
for experimental gene therapy, his only hope for a cure. Planes are full of
germs and his immune system is so fragile. And if the gene therapy doesn't work,
they'll still lose their son.

   "This is our first and only child and we just want to give Parker the best
medical attention and a fighting chance," said Tracy. "If it means we have to
quit our jobs, move to another country and go into debt, so be it. It will all
be worth it just to give Parker the chance to be a regular kid."

   Kevin, 34, and Tracy, 31, had no idea they both carried a mutation on the
same gene. The pregnancy went smoothly and there was never any indication of
what lay ahead.

   When they first received the diagnosis, Kevin went online to research the
disease and found there are only three possible treatments - a bone marrow
transplant, which has only a 30 per cent success rate in children with ADA, the
enzyme replacement treatment he currently receives or gene therapy.

   After talking to Dr. Alessandro Aiuti, the head of the Italian clinical
trial, they decided to sign their son up even though only six children have
received this particular therapy. None of them have died, though some still need
ongoing treatment.

   When Parker arrives in Milan, doctors there will remove stem cells from his
bone marrow, correct the DNA in them so that they contain a working gene that
produces the enzyme adenosine deaminase (ADA), then reinject them into his
bloodstream. They hope the stem cells will produce ADA, which removes toxins
from the body. Without it the toxins would accumulate in Parker's blood and
organs, eventually leading to life-threatening infections.

   SCID has also been called the boy-in-the-bubble disease due to the case of
David Vetter, born in 1971, who lived in a sterile bubble for 12 years until he
died in 1984 when, at his insistence, doctors tried a bone marrow transplant. He
was part of the inspiration for the movie The Boy in the Plastic Bubble.

   Parker is thriving now because he's getting ADA through enzyme injection
therapy called PEG-ADA. But it's extremely expensive - $2,500 an injection, and
he gets two a week. More important, it's no longer effective after two or three
years.

   Friends have organized a benefit concert next month to offset Parker's
medical expenses in Italy, where, although the treatment is covered, they expect
travel and accommodation to cost about $150,000.

   On Ward 8B at Sick Kids, Parker's parents and his two grandmothers are his
only visitors other than his doctors and the 10 nurses assigned to his case. The
entire ward is a reverse isolation unit, designed to protect patients from
infection. Most of the other children there are recovering from cancer treatment
that has weakened their immune systems.

   For months, Parker's parents worried he would never learn to smile because he
had never seen one to imitate.

   "Every day Tracy puts on a big smile underneath the mask that covers most of
her face, opens up her eyes as wide as she can and sings to him so he can hear
her voice," Kevin wrote on a blog chronicling each day of Parker's life.

   The only part of their skin that is exposed is on the neck, but "we do take
every precaution not to have skin to skin contact with him," Kevin said. "If we
noticed that he has touched our necks, we wash his hands."

   When Parker was born on Jan. 15 at Scarborough Centenary Hospital, everything
seemed normal. He came home to the nursery his parents had prepared for his
arrival, but six days later "he turned blue up to his knees," Kevin recalled.

   They called 911, but by the time paramedics arrived he seemed normal again. A
few days later, he started going blue again and his breathing was a little
rapid.

   The next night, his breathing grew worse and they took him to the emergency
room, where he was diagnosed with bronchitis and admitted. He stayed there for
two weeks with what eventually developed into pneumonia.

   "That's normally what happens with kids with SCID," Kevin explained. "He just
never got better."

   After they brought the baby home, he started projectile vomiting after Tracy
would breastfeed and, a few days later, he stopped breathing. Kevin performed
CPR until the ambulance arrived and this time, when they arrived at Scarborough
Centenary, his parents insisted that they send their baby to Sick Kids.

   After waiting for five or six hours, "he went upstairs and never left again."

   Doctors had a hunch but when the diagnosis came, it was shattering. His
immune system is "almost non-existent," said Kevin. Of the 10 forms of SCID,
"this is one of the worst."

   Without the ADA enzyme, the toxins that accumulate will kill his immune
system and eventually attack his organs.

   In the past 20 years, Sick Kids has treated only 15 children with the genetic
disorder.

   Now, after three treatments with PEG-ADA, Parker is gaining weight and his
immune system is starting to return.

   "He's a very strong little baby. He's a fighter," said Tracy proudly.

   They're hoping that he'll be strong enough to go home in a month and return
to Sick Kids twice a week for treatment. Under the protocol of the Italian
clinical trial, Parker has to be on the ADA treatment for six months before he
can undergo the gene therapy.

   After talking to Aiuti, Kevin and Tracy told Sick Kids they planned to go
ahead and "the hospital was very supportive," Kevin said.

   If Parker continues to improve, the next big hurdle will be getting him to
Italy. Planes are full of people and germs. Even though Parker's immune system
will have improved, he'll still be more susceptible to infections. At the very
least, he'll have to have a plastic guard around him, much like the rain shields
on strollers.

   "We're too far away from that point to have worked it out yet," his father
said.

   These days, Kevin is getting about 400 hits a day on his blog, many from all
over the world "which is what I want," he said. "I want as many people to know
about this disease as I can. I don't want people to find out when their babies
are seven months old that they have it after they've been sick a lot."

   "My gut feeling right from the beginning was that something was wrong," said
Tracy. "I think, 'Thank God I kept bringing him back to the hospital.'"

   A benefit concert, Playing for Parker, will be held at 8 p.m. Friday, June
16, at the Rivoli, 334 Queen St. W. Donations can also be made at any TD Canada
Trust branch under account number 590 6267228 or electronically on Kevin's
website, www.scidada.blogspot.com

GRAPHIC:  Photos courtesy Kevin DesLauriers A concert will be held June 16 at
the Rivoli to raise money to cover expenses to take Parker to Milan for
experimental gene therapy, his only hope for a cure. Doctors will remove stem
cells from his bone marrow, modify their DNA and reinject them into his
bloodstream.Photos courtesy Kevin DesLauriers A concert will be held June 16 at
the Rivoli to raise money to cover expenses to take Parker to Milan for
experimental gene therapy, his only hope for a cure. Doctors will remove stem
cells from his bone marrow, modify their DNA and reinject them into his
bloodstream.
 charla jones toronto star Kevin and Tracy DesLauriers are hoping their
four-month-old son, Parker, below, will be strong enough to return to his crib
at home in Ajax in a month.

LOAD-DATE: May 20, 2006


                              130 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2006 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                            February 3, 2006 Friday

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. C07

LENGTH: 580 words

HEADLINE: Genetic cheating could be at hand

BYLINE: Allan Ryan, Toronto Star

BODY:

   For years, anti-doping organizations have understood - feared even - that the
next wave of illegal performance-enhancing drugs would be genetic in nature.

   Evidence from a trial in Magdeburg, Germany, this week suggests that wave
might be closer than expected. Some believe there are monsters,
genetically-modified athletes, already among us - although, presumably, not
without glitches.

   "I think it's here in the sense that people know about the science, know they
can do these sort of things," said Dick Pound, chairman of the World Anti-Doping
Agency. "Whether they can make it work ... well, it's not a mail-order thing."

   Emails on a laptop computer seized in the investigation of German track coach
Thomas Springstein, charged with the alleged doping of young athletes in 2003,
contain references to the substance Repoxygen - widely regarded as the
groundbreaker into illegal genetic manipulation.

   Originally designed for gene therapy on patients with anemia, Repoxygen - or
its black market clone - can boost athletic performance by prompting the
production of erythropoietin, or EPO, and, hence, more red blood cells to carry
oxygen to the muscles.

   According to the Associated Press, one of Springstein's emails, contained an
exchange with the doctor of a Dutch speed skating club, in which Springstein
complained that the "new Repoxygen is hard to get. Please give me new
instructions soon so that I can order the product before Christmas."

   And alarm bells started sounding.

   Only not for Dr. Christiane Ayotte, director of Canada's anti-doping control
lab in Pte. Claire, Que. "I don't want to just throw water at the fire of
excitement over gene manipulation but I don't think we're that close - not at
all," said Ayotte, pointing out that Repoxygen, first proposed in 2002, had been
shelved after very preliminary testing.

   "They have tried to use gene medication, gene therapy, for legitimate medical
problems such as children suffering very serious conditions but some of them
developed very serious and more dangerous side effects so they stopped. And, if
we are not yet there for legitimate therapy ...

   "I know this is not what you want to hear," Ayotte added. "You want to hear,
'Ah, this is where we are now,' but I don't believe it. If an athlete has used
this, I doubt that he's still alive."

   "Our understanding is that a couple of people have tried it and have failed,"
said Pound, packing for the Turin Olympics. "Which is a good thing.

   "But we're getting to the point where there are going to be a number of
people out there trying this for improving performances and you have to assume
that one or more of them will be successful, whether its blind luck or great
science, you never really know.

   "Attempts to build a Frankenstein may be closer than we think but, so far, we
haven't seen any."

   "It's Frankensteinish-enough, already," said Ayotte. "What we see, for the
moment, is already horrendous. The mixtures, the cocktails that some athletes
are taking - potent medications, EPO, growth hormones, testosterone,
amphetamines. Some athletes are really like guinea pigs, practising chemistry on
themselves."

   Dr. Andrew Pipe, who formerly headed up Canada's anti-doping program and is
now with the University of Ottawa Heart Institute, is another who believes a
successful genetically modified athlete does not yet exist.

   Not yet.

   "It's not a question of 'if,' it's probably going to be a question of when
some of these gene products start to enter the world of doping," Pipe said.

LOAD-DATE: February 3, 2006


                              134 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2005 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                            December 12, 2005 Monday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A06

LENGTH: 756 words

HEADLINE: Chuck Strahl's big challenger is his inoperable lung cancer : Veteran
MP in re-election bid

BYLINE: Steve Mertl, Canadian Press; CANADIAN PRESS

DATELINE: CHILLIWACK, B.C.

BODY:

   After beating his nearest opponent by 15,000 votes in last year's federal
election, it's fair to say Conservative Chuck Strahl has no real opposition in
his bid to retain the bucolic Fraser Valley seat he's held since 1993.

   Unless you count the incurable cancer enveloping his lungs.

   Since being diagnosed in August, Strahl has learned to pronounce
mesothelioma, a rare form of cancer linked to asbestos exposure that attacks the
pleura, the lining that protects the lungs.

   Although it was caught at a very early stage when Strahl went to the doctor
with a collapsed lung, it's inoperable.

   "They also clearly have no idea of how it'll develop," says Strahl, his
resonant basso voice undiminished by the disease.

   Neither radiation nor surgery would be effective. There are chemotherapy
options and Strahl, 48, is also investigating experimental gene therapy.

   Ironically, Strahl's relative youth - most mesothelioma patients are elderly
- and vigour could screen him out of the drug trial. "There's always a
possibility I'll be rejected because I'm not sick enough," he says with no trace
of irony.

   But treatment decisions are months away, if not longer. The former logging
contractor who spent years inhaling asbestos brake dust from heavy equipment is
doing what he's always done, just getting on with things.

   "For someone to say 'You have cancer, I think you should go home now and pull
the sheets over your head,' it's just not in my personality to do that," says
Strahl. "And my family knows that too. They wouldn't ask me to do that."

   Since first being elected as a Reformer 12 years ago, Strahl earned a
reputation as a work horse, rising to become deputy speaker in the
Liberal-dominated House.

   Strahl's decision to seek a fifth term in Parliament in his Chilliwack-Fraser
Canyon riding apparently encountered no opposition from his wife, Deb, nor his
four grown children to run in the Jan. 23 election.

   "Once we got the initial word (and) the doctors told him to keep living his
life, keep running, keep working, keep doing it all, there was no real
discussion," says son Mark, 27, who works for Tory incumbent Randy Kamp's
campaign in adjacent Pitt Meadows-Mission-Maple Ridge.

   "You're dealing with someone who ran a marathon in May. Even with the
diagnosis he's fitter than I am."

   Aside from regular medical checkups, little has changed. Strahl's wife of 30
years, Deb, accompanied him back to Ottawa more frequently on his weekly
commute. "I'm just tickled pink by that," he says.

   Strahl is already back jogging but that doesn't stop constituents from asking
after him.

   "I always tell people I feel fine, and I do," he says.

   "I'm trying not to play a sympathy vote. I just tell people I'm back to work,
working my regular shift. I feel good."

   Jane, who wouldn't give her last name, is having coffee with a friend at a
mall in Chilliwack, a city of 62,000 that anchors the riding about 90 kilometres
east of Vancouver.

   "Why should that stop him?" she asks. "Good for him for hanging in there."

   Ill or not, Strahl is a formidable opponent. He won with 52 per cent of the
vote in 2004, down from 70 per cent in 2000.

   The NDP's candidate won't be nominated until today and the Liberals so far
have no declared candidate.

   "It would take a political earthquake this time to unseat Chuck Strahl here
locally," says NDP riding association president Rollie Keith, who finished
second in 2004 with 9,244 votes to Strahl's 24,096.

   "So I think when you run against him you try to represent your party as well
as you can."

   Strahl's comfortable enough that the Tories will drop him into closer fought
races to help out, especially where there are no Conservative incumbents.

   "There's no question we've discussed it," says Senator Gerry St. Germain,
B.C. campaign co-chair. "He's an excellent communicator.

   "I'm sure he's going to be able to help some of the newer candidates in some
of these ridings where we're going to have our hands full."

   The health-care system earned generally good marks from Strahl's involuntary
fact-finding trip. But it's reinforced his determination to push for a national
cancer strategy when he gets back to Ottawa.

   The Commons passed a Tory-sponsored motion last spring that proposed a
five-year, $250-million program to improve information sharing among provincial
cancer agencies.

   The government, however, favoured its own more modest $50-million proposal,
says Strahl.

   "I don't want to be Mr. Cancer," he says. "I don't want to be beating just
this one horse. But on the other hand it's something the party supported before
I got cancer."

GRAPHIC:  RICHARD LAM cp Conservative MP Chuck Strahl, in his home riding in
Chilliwack, B.C., last week, was diagnosed last August with mesothelioma, a rare
form of lung cancer linked to asbestos exposure. Says Strahl, 48, who has held
his Fraser Valley seat since 1993: "I'm trying not to play a sympathy vote... I
feel good.''

LOAD-DATE: December 12, 2005


                              137 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2005 Sun Media Corporation
                          London Free Press (Ontario)

                           November 22, 2005 Tuesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFESTYLES; Pg. C8

LENGTH: 298 words

HEADLINE: HIGHER RISKS WORTH IT TO BEAT ALZHEIMER'S

BYLINE: BY AP

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   A fog is slowly creeping over Dr. William Deutsch's brain. He'd try a risky
experiment, even one requiring brain surgery, in hopes of at least stalling his
incurable dementia. But scientists have little to offer.

   Families facing Alzheimer's disease and similar dementias increasingly are
calling for a shot at riskier therapies that might bring bigger benefits than
today's pretty safe, but largely disappointing, drugs.

   It's a conundrum: Dementia robs its victims of the ability to fully consent
to medical experiments. When loved ones can do so for them varies in part
according to how much risk is involved.

   Critics say that's one reason scientists and regulators have generally
treated Alzheimer's more like a chronic disease than the killer it is,
tolerating fewer side-effects than for, say, cancer therapies. They cite the
2002 cancellation of a study of a vaccine designed to attack Alzheimer's
brain-clogging gunk that caused serious brain inflammation in a few patients.

   Now the tide seems to be turning. Scientists are tentatively exploring a
handful of bold, sometimes invasive, approaches -- from another vaccine attempt
to a gene therapy that requires brain injections -- prompting an ethical debate
about how to study a vulnerable population.

   Patients and caregivers want a voice in those decisions and often accept more
risk than doctors predict, was the overarching message when the Alzheimer's
Association arranged an unusual meeting between families, drug developers and
the U.S. Food and Drug Administration.

   "No one has ever survived this disease," said University of Arkansas athletic
director Frank Broyles, the whose wife recently died of Alzheimer's.

   "We would take any risk," even a drug with a 50 per cent chance of death, if
it offered an equal hope of benefit, he said.

LOAD-DATE: November 22, 2005


                              142 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2005 Sun Media Corporation
                          London Free Press (Ontario)

                           September 26, 2005 Monday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: OPINION PAGES; Pg. A7

LENGTH: 820 words

HEADLINE: RIDING THE BIOTECH BOOM;
THE LONDON REGION IS A KEY PLAYER IN A NEW SCIENCE THAT BRINGS HOPE TO THE
WORLD.

BYLINE: BY JOY WARKENTIN, SPECIAL TO THE FREE PRESS

BODY:

   "Revolutionary, unprecedented, unsurpassed."

   In 2001, these adjectives were used by the International Food Information
Council (IFIC) to describe the potential impact of the human genome project, a
direct result of biotechnology research.

   Though biotechnology may not be in the common vocabulary of every Canadian
citizen, it is fairly well known that Canada is a nation renowned for research
on modern life's most devastating diseases -- including diabetes, AIDS and
cancer -- research areas now being innovated by such biotech-related
applications as gene therapy (the replacing of a damaged or missing gene to
restore its proper function in the body.)

   Biotechnology is broadly defined as "the use of living things (plants,
organisms) to improve processes and products."

   What this definition suggests, but doesn't outright describe for us, is the
absolutely enormous impact that biotechnology can have on our everyday lives and
on every single life.

   In addition to disease control and eradication efforts, Canada is a
recognized leader in the development of bio-fuels. Skyrocketing gasoline prices
have caused renewed interest in fuel alternatives such as ethanol and biodiesel,
which are most often developed from genetically modified seeds and enzymes.

   And not only is biotechnology helping to produce these cost-efficient and
environmentally friendly fuels, it's helping to produce their core ingredients
more quickly (corn for ethanol production), with less environmental disruption.
Biotech research is also allowing farmers to grow more produce on less land,
including drought-prone areas, and to develop new food breeds, such as golden
rice, that are nutrient-rich, resistant to insects and disease, and critical for
the survival of Third World populations.

   A great deal of this work, particularly the pioneering of new treatments for
disease, is being done right here in London, the home of the discovery of
insulin, among other outstanding medical breakthroughs.

   For this reason, Fanshawe College is proud to be a partner in the creation of
London's first ever Biotechnology Week, which begins today and runs until
Friday.

   Spearheaded by the TechAlliance of Southwestern Ontario, an organization of
which Fanshawe is a founding member, Biotechnology Week seeks to raise awareness
and to celebrate the outstanding capacity for biotechnology research and
innovation in this community and across the country. London, TechAlliance,
Fanshawe College and other partners such as the University of Western Ontario
and the Stiller Centre for Biotechnology Commercialization, join 14 other
Canadian cities and more than 40 national partners in this effort.

   National Biotechnology Week, now entering its second annual celebration, is a
world first --unique to Canada.

   In terms of global competitiveness, Canada ranks second only to the U.S. in
number of biotech companies -- 500 across the country. These companies, which
are mostly small and medium-sized, employ roughly 12,000 people and in 2003, had
revenues of more than $3.8 billion.

   Biotech Week in London is very much a community affair. It is an opportunity
for those of us not directly involved in biotech research -- businesses,
institutions, community leaders and members of the public -- to champion
London's goal of becoming a leader in the biotech sector and to celebrate the
potential this community has for research, discovery and commercialization of
products and technologies that may affect quality of life for all Canadians and
those in need around the world.

   Community involvement is central to Fanshawe's mission. The Fanshawe applied
degree in biotechnology for example, was born out of a need for highly skilled
people in the regional biotechnology sector. This program marries the
theoretical and the applied, resulting in a challenging and practical learning
experience.

   Our students, the first of whom began studies only two weeks ago, will study
traditional content such as theoretical molecular biology, microbiology,
virology and toxicology, as well as related social, economic, ethical, legal and
environmental issues.

   Our graduates will fill the need for highly qualified individuals in such
areas as medicine and pharmaceuticals, in research and development, quality and
regulatory settings or in technical sales support -- jobs that are increasingly
available in this community.

   Our ability to educate and retain these young people will contribute to the
overall wealth creation capability in this city -- and a resulting high quality
of life. And this is something Fanshawe College is very passionate about.

   The catchphrase for biotechnology in this community and beyond is impact.
Revolutionary, unprecedented, unsurpassed impact -- on disease sufferers, on
starving populations, on the environment, on farmers, on consumers and on
quality of life right here in London.

   For more information on London Biotechnology Week, please visit
www.techalliance.ca

NOTES:  Joy Warkentin is vice-president for academic services at Fanshawe
College.

GRAPHIC: photo by File Photo WAVE OF TOMORROW: Forensic DNA technologist Nathan
Muzos holds a DNA sample at a biotech lab in Dallas, Tex. With 500 biotechnology
companies, Canada ranks second only to the United States.

LOAD-DATE: September 26, 2005


                              164 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2005 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                             April 7, 2005 Thursday

SECTION: PLANET; Pg. P04

LENGTH: 275 words

HEADLINE: Role model Natalie Raso, teen scientist

BODY:

   Natalie Raso is one of Canada's top teen scientists. The Grade 10 student
from Hamilton will be a member of Team Canada in Arizona at an event considered
the Stanley Cup of science fairs.

   Her project is on using viruses to kill cancer.

   It's yet another honour for Natalie, 16. Last year, her success at the
Canada-Wide Science Fair earned her an all-expenses paid trip to the APEC Youth
Science Festival in Beijing.

   At that event, students from around the world were put in 40 groups and asked
to write a paper on a specific topic. Raso's group took first prize with a paper
on gene therapy.

   The trip to China was "an amazing experience," Raso said. It also made her
appreciate Canada even more.

   Raso first heard about virus therapy while she was in China.

   It piqued her interest so much that she contacted the Centre for Gene
Therapeutics at McMaster University after her return.

   That led to meetings with researchers Karen Mossman and Jeff Hummel, who are
working on a virus with the potential to treat cancer.

   "I wanted to test if it was an effective and safe virus therapy," Raso said.
"I wanted to investigate that by testing it on cancerous cells and non-cancerous
cells."

   Raso said the virus selectively killed all cancer cells during the course of
the experiment, but did not kill a single normal cell.

   Raso carried out her project at a Mac lab, under the guidance of Mossman and
Hummel. Since last November she's been working on it five days a week, after her
regular school day plus basketball and volleyball practice.

   - Christine Cox / Hamilton Spectator

   news report

   After b-ball and v-ball practice, Natalie likes to sit down to a little
cancer research

GRAPHIC:  Ron pozzer hamilton spectator R&D: Natalie heads to Intel
International Science and Engineering Fair in May.

LOAD-DATE: April 7, 2005


                              167 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2005 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                             March 20, 2005 Sunday

SECTION: Pg. D03

LENGTH: 1264 words

HEADLINE: Meet the Methuselah man

BYLINE: Peter Calamai, Toronto Star

DATELINE: OTTAWA

BODY:

   Forget about being offered shares in a perpetual-motion machine or the
promise of faster-than-light travel. Aubrey de Grey wants to sell you a
seemingly impossible dream: an end to aging.

   The self-taught "theoretical biomedical gerontologist" says anyone can be
Methuselah as long as they avoid accidental death and submit to a few medical
therapies, as yet uninvented.

   And if the prospect of living for thousands of years - what he terms an
"indefinite" healthy life - is a hard sell, that's only because society has put
itself in a "trance" over aging and death.

   "It's a coping strategy, because no one wants to spend their lives worrying
about this ghastly thing that's going to happen to them on a fairly predictable
time scale," de Grey says. "Once you're in this state, it's a bit difficult to
notice when aging stops being inevitable and when the time has come that we've
learned enough that we might have a fighting chance of doing something about
it."

   For the 41-year-old Englishman, that time is now, and his self-assumed
mission is to proselytize for "robust human regeneration."

   In the past five years, de Grey - trained as a computer scientist - has
delivered countless speeches, including two last month in Canada.

   He has also poured out a stream of articles in peer-reviewed scientific
literature and been the subject of feature articles in serious magazines like
Fortune and last month's Technology Review, which is published by the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT).

   He's got a seven-point research plan, a foundation, a New York public
relations agency, and sympathizers and committed followers in Europe and North
America.

   He is also the instigator of the M (for Methuselah) Prize, which awards a $1
million (U.S.) cheque to the researcher who can make two-year-old mice live to
five years, tripling their expected remaining life.

   "I reckon that is an impressive enough result that, if you read it in the
paper, you would be convinced that there is a fair prospect that similar results
might come in humans in the next couple of decades," de Grey says. "You wouldn't
know that it was going to happen, but you wouldn't be able to carry on
persuading yourself that it was impossible.

   "And you would vote for it, so overnight it will become impossible to get
elected except on a manifesto of having a proper war on aging. And I mean a war
on aging on the scale of the war on Iraq and more."

   De Grey estimates that delivering success in mice could cost $100 million
(U.S.) a year and take a decade.

   With an even bigger investment and the right breaks in the research lab, he
says this impossible dream could arrive for humanity within 25 years. He calls
that reaching "life extension escape velocity."

   "I'm certainly not saying that we will have therapies in 25 years that
eliminate aging so thoroughly that people live to a thousand. I'm saying we will
have therapies, and it is the rate of improvement of those therapies that will
make people who are alive today live to a thousand."

   First-generation therapies would add 30 to 40 years to a healthy life span,
even if started by someone already 60. While those people were enjoying their
years as they approached 100, scientists would come up with second-generation
therapies to extend life even more.

   Says de Grey, with what sounds like a touch of asperity, "Some people who
accuse me of being completely mad for making these predictions are doing so
largely because they haven't understood this very important point."

   All the above quotes by de Grey are printed as delivered. There were no false
starts, no grammatical slips, no ums and ahs. For 75 minutes down a phone line
from Cambridge, England, where he works as the computer support for a university
genetics team, de Gray spoke in flawless, fluid prose.

   Dr. Sherwin Nuland, a professor of surgery at Yale's medical school, had the
same unnerving experience during 10 hours of talks with de Grey for his article
in Technology Review.

   "He has the gift of expressing himself both verbally and in print with such
clarity and completeness that a listener finds himself entranced by the flow of
seemingly logical statements following one after the other," Nuland wrote,
emphasizing "seemingly."

   Such seeming logic pervades Strategies for Engineered Negligible Senescence
(SENS), the seven components of the aging process that de Grey says can be tamed
by the appropriate advances in molecular biology.

   (For more details, visit www.gen.cam.ac.uk/sens.)

   On the phone, de Grey gallops though the list, not even pausing after saying,
"I've got a really, really good cure for all age-related cancers."

   The "cure" depends on combining the experimental procedure of gene therapy
with the currently controversial practice of stem-cell injection.

   The therapy would knock out the gene that produces an enzyme called
telomerase, which is essential to cell division.

   Eliminating all telomerase would mean that cells couldn't reproduce
uncontrollably, as in most cancers. But it would also mean an end to the
replication of cells that need to divide, such as blood, skin and gut. So every
decade or so, the genetically engineered humans would have to receive a
stem-cell injection.

   On his website, de Grey comments, "The idea of course sounds crazy at first
hearing, but it may well be possible."

   Some of the other therapies in the seven-point plan may initially involve up
to a month's stay in hospital. In theory this could be reduced to no more than a
day within a decade and eventually become just a simple injection or pill. Even
huge initial costs aren't a barrier to launching the war on aging, in de Grey's
view.

   "One has to come up with a reason that outweighs the reason to cure aging,
which is that it kills 100,000 people a day. One has to come up with a reason
that it's better to continue condemning 100,000 people a day to an early death.
Forever. And that's pretty difficult."

   When explaining the scientific aspects of his plan, de Grey is unfailingly
patient.

   Yet he can be dismissive when dealing with the ethical considerations,
especially the issue of adding yet more people to a world many already consider
overcrowded.

   "If you ask people whether they think it would be a good idea to cure aging
completely, most people come over all solemn and ambivalent and start talking
about overpopulation, inequality, immortal tyrant and rubbish like that," he
says.

   "What I like to emphasize is simply that the future should have the right to
choose. We do not have the right to impose the unavailability of long life spans
on future societies by hesitating now to develop the technology."

   Married since 1991, de Grey and his American wife have never wanted children.
He's said numerous times that he's convinced that most people would opt for life
extension over having children, if they had the choice. That view has stirred up
criticism but, with characteristic frankness, he doesn't hesitate in repeating
it.

   "It could be that in 50 or 80 or 100 years' time when these technologies have
been developed that society will decide to abandon them because the alternative
is having very few children around, and people don't like having very few
children around.

   "Or they may, alternatively, decide that children are a bit of a pain in the
neck anyway and it's actually more fun to carry on not getting old and to do
other things with one's life.

   "We don't know what society will choose to do, and we have no right to
guess."'Overnight

   it will become impossible

   to get elected except on a manifesto of having a proper war on aging.

   And I mean

   a war on aging

   on the scale

   of the war

   on Iraq and more'

GRAPHIC:  randy Quan for the toronto star Cambridge University professor Aubrey
de Grey is a 'theoretical biomedical gerontologist.'

LOAD-DATE: April 6, 2005


                              172 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2005 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                           January 29, 2005 Saturday

SECTION: Pg. E10

LENGTH: 1344 words

HEADLINE: The war against wasting diseases

BYLINE: Peter Calamai, Toronto Star

DATELINE: OTTAWA

BODY:

   When Neil Cashman was in medical school in the late 1970s, he was taught that
"slow viruses" were the agents responsible for a one-in-a-million, brain-wasting
disease in people called Creutzfeldt-Jacob disease (CJD) and also for scrapie, a
similar but more common affliction in sheep.

   Now, as a principal investigator of the University of Toronto's Centre for
Research in Neurodegenerative Diseases, Dr. Cashman devotes 12-hour days to
tackling the mysteries of the agent that's really responsible for scrapie, CJD,
chronic wasting disease in elk and deer, bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE)
in cattle and the fatal disease that people can get from eating bits of
BSE-infected cattle, called variant CJD or just vCJD.

   That agent is a virtually indestructible rogue protein called a prion, and it
hit the scientific world like a shock wave only two decades ago.

   Much about prions today still remains "a puzzlement" says Cashman, quoting
Yul Brynner's character from the musical The King and I.

   Yet not as much of a puzzlement as it would be without the powerful tools and
insights now flowing from the human genome project completed just four years
ago.

   Consider the impoverished state of scientific knowledge when BSE first
erupted in Britain in the early 1980s, eventually infecting an estimated 1.9
million cattle, although only about 200,000 "mad cows" were identified by spot
checks.

   "It was ground zero. There was effectively no knowledge base at all," says
BSE researcher Stephen Moore at the University of Alberta in Edmonton.

   "The crisis occurred because the science simply wasn't up to speed. It took a
long time just to figure out that the disease was linked to the feed."

   Recently, scientific knowledge in the field has been advancing "by leaps and
bounds," says Moore, a bovine geneticist and researcher at the Alberta Centre
for Prions and Protein Folding Diseases.

   One such leap is the bovine genome project, an international collaboration
that parallels the human one and involves researchers at several universities
and labs across Canada, including Moore's. Another is the proposal for a
National Centre of Excellence in prions, championed by Cashman and currently
being weighed by a federal granting agency.

   And there are some huge puzzlements for this new effort to tackle. According
to Moore, Cashman and other experts, here are four important things that we
don't know about BSE and other prion diseases:

   1. How diseases develop

   Scientists believe they have identified the likely starting and end points of
these diseases but the steps in between are eluding discovery.

   The starting point is a protein found normally in the bodies of most mammals,
including cattle, sheep and people. This prion protein is most abundant in the
brain and central nervous system. These normal prion proteins are also the raw
material for making rogue prion proteins, whose name is usually shortened to
prions. Prions are made up of exactly the same chemical building blocks as
normal prion proteins but they're folded into an abnormal disease-causing shape
that eventually leaves brain tissue riddled with holes like a sponge.

   It resembles an origami exercise gone spectacularly wrong.

   In all but a few rare spontaneous cases, the process begins when a small
number of prions from somewhere else enter the body. Cattle first came down with
BSE after eating bits of scrapie-infected sheep used as a cheap protein booster
in farm feed. And the 150 people who have so far fallen victim to vCJD either
ate bits from contaminated cattle or, in two cases, received blood transfusions
from people already infected with vCJD.

   It's still unclear how this initial stock of prions makes the journey to the
brain and successfully outsmarts its defence against such attackers, called the
blood-brain barrier. Once inside the brain, however, prions apparently carry out
a feat that is even more mysterious - they somehow cause the brain's normal
prion proteins to misfold themselves into deadly prions. One current theory
likens the process to crystallization, with the prion like a seed crystal that
"recruits" the normal prion protein to adopt its misfolded shape. American
biochemist Stanley Prusiner, awarded the Nobel Prize for first identifying the
prion, has suggested a Protein X may help in this conversion.

   But no one really knows what happens. Understanding the process is probably
crucial to explaining other key mysteries, such as why only a few cattle become
infected when a herd of several hundred eats contaminated feed or why 60 per
cent of people appear to have genetic protection against vCJD.

   2. How to detect infection

   This is a numbers game played for life-and-death stakes. Scientists define
one prion as one unit of infectivity and one unit injected directly into a cow's
brain is enough to trigger BSE. Reliable infection through the blood requires 10
units and through feed about 10,000. That last figure isn't as big as it might
seem, since one gram of brain from a mouse killed by prion disease can contain
about one billion units.

   Right now there are several tests used to detect dangerous prions, but only
in brain tissue and only from dead cattle. Two are very time-consuming and
useful for research but not for mass screening. A third produces results within
eight hours but works only with high levels of prions. The fourth is even faster
and more sensitive but not yet proven on tissue from live mammals.

   The Holy Grail is an inexpensive and rapid test that could detect even tiny
amounts - such as 10 units - in blood and urine so it could be used with people
and other mammals. At least a hundred academic and commercial labs around the
world are engaged in this highly competitive search.

   Such a test would allow food inspection agencies to screen the majority of
cattle slaughtered, those younger than two years and showing no outward signs of
disease rather than just the old and obviously sick, as now. It would also make
possible testing of potential vaccines in mammals and treatments for people.

   3. How to treat or prevent prion infections

   Even without understanding why only nerve cells die, researchers might still
be able to discover effective treatment or prevention. Cashman's lab is one of
those investigating potential vaccines that would build upon prion interaction
with the immune system. Another avenue being explored is gene therapy to
introduce the resistant normal prion proteins present in 60 per cent of people
into the other 40 per cent whose prion proteins are vulnerable to misfolding. By
analogy, researchers are already breeding scrapie-resistant strains of sheep.

   So far no drugs have leapt out of the pack. The ones that are effective in
lab animal tests either haven't worked in human vCJD patients or are too toxic.

   But the recovery of infected mice after scientists turned off their
production of normal prion proteins has suggested searching for compounds to do
the same thing in humans. Finally, treatment with embryonic stem cells might
ultimately provide a way to halt further neurological decline in people
afflicted with vCJD.

   There could also be an added payoff from this research, Cashman suggested in
a recent article in an academic journal.

   "The prion diseases could provide a prototype for other disorders of protein
misfolding," he wrote, "including Alzheimer's disease, amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis (ALS) and Parkinson's disease."

   4. When will we have answers?

   Many researchers are optimistic two of these prion mysteries - the detection
tests and potential treatment or prevention - will be cleared up within 10 to 15
years. That's because much of the necessary basic science has been done or is
well advanced. The challenge lies largely in technological application.

   The other three, however, could be solved this year or remain mysteries into
mid-century.

   It's a matter of asking the right questions, general progress in related
areas of basic research like genomics and - as usual - serendipity.

   Says BSE expert Stephen Moore at the University of Alberta: "The big
impediment is that so much about prions is so unique."

GRAPHIC:  Ron Bull toronto star Dr. Neil Cashman, left, and Dr. Marty Lehto,
study the virtually indestructible rogue protein, called a prion, responsible
for wasting diseases that attack humans and animals such as deer and cattle.

LOAD-DATE: January 29, 2005


                              173 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2005 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                            January 16, 2005 Sunday

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. B06

LENGTH: 2767 words

HEADLINE: Engineering the end of sport as we know it

BODY:

   A world-class cyclist returns from the road, showers and jumps into an
altitude chamber for a nap. Olympians take them on the road so they can chat and
eat lunch at 10,000 feet. U.S. long-track speed skaters live in dormitory rooms
that mimic the atmosphere at the highest peaks of the Canadian Rockies.

   Though it has the air of speculative fiction, all of it is happening today.

   Endurance athletes know that "living high and training low" can increase
speed and endurance by 5 per cent, a large enough margin to help get them across
the finish line first.

   This is only one way in which athletes are exploiting scientific knowledge to
push the limits of human performance. But advances in technology and training
regimens will soon seem as old-fashioned as running laps on a dirt track.

   Gene science is sitting on the sidelines ready to make the leap from the lab
to the arena, with some athletes eager to embrace one of medical science's
newest and most exciting - and most troubling - frontiers.

   One leading American scientist, who recently showed how gene science could
enhance mouse muscle, regularly receives a stream of e-mail requests from
athletes clamouring for access to the new technologies.

   The possibilities are extraordinary:

   Parents could engineer their child to be a sports champion by tinkering with
their genetic make-up as an embryo.

   Athletes could inject synthetic genes into their bodies to boost muscle mass
and increase muscle performance.

   Countries could select future gold medallists by screening for
sports-performance genes.

   Though not here yet, experts agree gene science may some day show up in the
Olympic Village, in the locker rooms of professional leagues and on university
playing fields.

   "It is coming. It's not here, but it is coming," says Thomas Murray, a
leading U.S. bioethicist.

   And before it arrives, there's a shrinking window in which to debate the
possibilities.

   Will genetically modified athletes change the nature of sport?

   Will fair play, often distorted by athletes who use banned substances, become
even more perverted as gene enhancement and selection technologies enter the
sports arena alongside athletes?

   If athletes are to break more world records, dunk more baskets and whack more
home runs, perhaps elite sport will have to find innovative ways to push the
limits of the body.

   At the heart of the issue are the dreams of young athletes: Will science
sideline those who aren't genetically modified?

   'Pushing barriers of what

   people will accept as sport'

   Creating a super athlete by tinkering with the genetic makeup of an embryo
approaches the realm of a ludicrously plotted Hollywood movie.

   Methods don't yet exist for what scientists call "germ-line modification" in
humans, but though the procedure is likely decades away - scientists have yet to
find a way to get new genes that have been inserted into germ cells to stick in
the right places - and is not yet being investigated in larger animals and
humans, the possibility hovers on the horizon, tempting some and scaring others.

   Germ-line modification may one day be used to eliminate diseases such as
cancer, but similar techniques could also be used to enhance otherwise healthy
individuals. Because germ-line modification changes the genes in parents' eggs
or sperm, and those changes are passed down through the generations, the
practice is almost universally banned.

   "There's a high degree of disapproval in principle for that kind of
generational change until the techniques are much more in hand and much more
predictable and much safer than they are anywhere near being at the moment,"
says Theodore Friedmann, the director of the University of California at San
Diego's Program in Human Gene Therapy.

   However, discussion about its value and allure is certainly on the table.

   Scientists and ethicists argue that the risks of germ-line modification
transcend an individual, with some saying the technology interrupts human
evolution, allows humans to play God, and challenges the very notion of what it
means to be human.

   Even athletes see the danger.

   "We're already pushing the barriers of what people will accept as sport
because athletes are already genetically different than people in the stands,"
says three-time Olympic kayaker Renn Crichlow.

   "Sport has to have some connection to the common person. If all athletes are
7'6" and 350 pounds, it becomes less sport and more spectacle. It becomes the
circus."

   To help bring clarity to a complicated issue, ethicists have brought the
debate in front of scientists and the sports community. In the forefront is the
Montreal-based World Anti-Doping Agency, or WADA.

   "Most people are convinced that there is a real possibility that genetic
modification is going to be applied in sport, and WADA is doing what it can to
get ahead of the issue," says Friedmann, who thinks the discussion of how gene
science should fit into society is often either trivialized or sensationalized.

   By adopting a proactive approach, WADA hopes to promote and preserve a level
playing field for competing athletes.

   Succeeding on 'brains and

   [a] willingness to suffer'

   Sport at its best magnifies admirable human qualities - determination,
discipline, drive. If laboratory scientists start producing athletes, sport may
simply cease to be human.

   Athletes in the thick of the Olympic battle hope those with the innate
personal qualities needed to go for the gold will continue to persevere. "I have
seen the greatest talents give up very young and never reach their potential,
and then seen lesser gifted athletes do incredible things because of the power
of their brains and their willingness to suffer," says Clara Hughes, an Olympic
athlete who has represented Canada in the Summer Games as a cyclist and the
Winter Games as a speed skater.

   "It is a complicated thing to succeed in sport, but also, in ways, a simple
process that requires time, commitment and great patience," she says. "When
people do not have patience and do not want to take the time to progress at
their own rate, they can begin to go in a bad direction."

   Crichlow, meanwhile, says WADA's approach marks the first time an
organization is managing to keep one step ahead of rogue athletes. The
cat-and-mouse game between sporting officials and athletes and their chemists
has almost always been a one-sided affair.

   Whether WADA can stay ahead of the much more devious issue of gene doping -
in which synthetic genes, instead of drugs, could be injected into athletes to
boost muscle mass and increase performance - is another question.

   Although scientists don't know when athletes will hijack gene-therapy
techniques to use in gene doping, almost all agree that it's inevitable. Some
have little doubt that gene-doped athletes will be among the competitors in
Beijing at the 2008 Olympic Games.

   The idea behind gene therapy is to fix genetic defects by inserting new genes
into a body's cells. Scientists believe it may be used to develop treatments for
diseases such as hemophilia and cystic fibrosis.

   Athletes who use the techniques, however, aren't replacing defective genes
but adding new ones to enhance muscle strength or endurance, or increase the
cardiovascular system's ability to deliver blood.

   H. Lee Sweeney, a pioneer in gene therapy, began investigating gene therapy
in the late 1990s in the hope of slowing the muscle degeneration that comes with
age or from diseases such as muscular dystrophy. Even then he understood that
his research would be the basis for gene doping in athletes.

   'It's not like taking a drug,

   you can't just stop taking it'

   Unlike using anabolic steroids, gene doping is a one-time deal, and detecting
new genes inserted into an athlete can't be done using traditional blood and
urine tests.

   Consider the unique difficulties. Some suggest catching cheats by biopsing
(taking a sample of) the muscle into which the new genes have been injected. But
which muscle? And would any athlete agree to such a surgical procedure before a
competition?

   The best hope could lie in ongoing research into how proteins might be
measured to spot minute differences in the body chemicals of a gene-doped
athlete. No such test, however, currently exists.

   What makes the procedure's risk especially pernicious is its irreversibility.

   "It's not like taking a drug, you can't just stop taking it," says Sweeney.
Once those genes are put into a human, they're stuck with them.

   Because gene transfer is such a dicey business, research is being done
primarily on animals and in limited human trials; no scientist wants to risk the
well being of a healthy human.

   In one of the rare human trials that have been carried out, a small group of
European adolescents suffering from a life-threatening immune disorder were
treated with gene therapy. Though they were cured, two of the adolescents later
developed leukemia.

   Despite the dangers, the pioneering work on gene therapy is proving so
alluring to some who make their living in the world of sport, they're actually
clamouring to subject themselves to its dangers.

   "It's really amazing to me that I get these e-mails at a constant flow," says
Sweeney, chairman of physiology at the University of Pennsylvania School of
Medicine. "They're second-tier athletes who would like to be in the first tier,
and they want a competitive advantage that no one else has because they won't
get to the competitive level with training."

   And what would it take to satisfy the yearning of a "second-tier athlete" to
be more than they could otherwise hope to be? Less than you might think.

   "A small, standard molecular biology laboratory with three or four people
stocked with the usual kinds of equipment would be all that would be required...
and could cost far less than $1 million to staff and equip," says Friedmann. "So
it's peanuts - in the sports moneyed world, it's peanuts."

   Gene doping could be 'safer than most synthetic drugs'

   WADA labelled gene doping as a banned procedure in 2003, hoping to deter
athletes from exploring the immature technology.

   Andrew Pipe, a physician at the University of Ottawa Heart Institute and
former chief medical officer to Canada's Olympic team, is optimistic that WADA's
efforts will reduce the likelihood of gene science spilling over into the sport
community, but he acknowledges that athletes still might not care about the
risks.

   Even though there are known risks associated with transfusing blood cells or
using anabolic steroids, some athletes still choose, either through naivete or
recklessness, to disregard the warnings.

   And, says Pipe, "It's quite likely that that naivete or recklessness might
extend to consideration of gene-transfer technologies," adding that it's more
likely that certain members of the athletic entourage - coaches, for example -
may be making that decision.

   As gene-transfer technologies are refined over the next decades, they may
become common practice for treating disease. Athletes may then adopt the same
techniques to enhance performance.

   This is one reason Andy Miah, a professor of bioethics at the University of
Paisley in Scotland and author of Genetically Modified Athletes: Biomedical
Ethics, Gene Doping And Sport, believes the sporting world shouldn't approach
genetic modification in the same way it has tried to solve the doping problem.

   "Gene doping does not have the same social meaning as drugs in sport," he
says. "Its use is not associated with anti-social behaviour. It is not
considered to be an addictive substance, and it is unlikely to give rise to
significant long-term health risks.

   "In fact, it has the potential to be considerably safer than most synthetic
drugs."

   That potential, however, hasn't been thoroughly tested.

   Friedmann, one of the world's leading authorities on gene transfer and a
member of WADA, says that, given the current state of the technology, gene
doping is both foolish and dangerous.

   "Athletes - and their agents - should not force an unripe technology onto
athletes," says Friedmann. "It will be harmful and, in all likelihood, it won't
do what one is intending for it to do."

   'We can warp the childhood ... of a lot of young people'

   Researchers at the Australian Institute of Sport have identified a gene -
alpha-actinin-3 or ACTN3 - they say can predict whether a person has the innate
ability to be a sprinter or an endurance athlete. Although in its infancy, using
genes to select elite athletes has an appeal that's difficult to shake. When
compared to countries like China, Australia considers its small population an
obstacle to producing top athletes and looks to science to keep ahead in the
medal race.

   The Australian Institute of sport is studying DNA samples of their elite
athletes and hoping to soon direct athletes to a specific sport in which they
might excel based on their genetic make-up.

   But skepticism abounds about the accuracy and precision of genetic
preselection techniques. "Sport performance is obviously a mixture of innate
talent and physical capability and training and opportunities and schooling and
family pressures," says Friedmann. "At the moment it's just simply not possible
to identify all or many of the genetic factors involved in a successful athletic
performance."

   For instance, some combination of growth hormones and genes will make some
people very tall. "So they might become basketball players," Friedmann says. "Or
they might be gangly and uncoordinated and hate sports."

   To explain the ethical concerns of genetic preselection, bioethicist Murray
paints this picture of a young person who is being genetically tracked to be an
athlete:

   He has been genetically selected. He is predisposed to being an excellent
sprinter. He is asked to forsake his social life, forsake his studies, and focus
exclusively on sprinting.

   But, asks Murray, "What if that person doesn't really give a damn? Or it
turns out they want to do it, but they are not really as talented as the genetic
prophets claim they are?

   "So they devote all this time and they turn out to be mediocre at best. I
think we can warp the childhood and adolescence of a lot of young people if we
carry this too far."

   The destination grows 'more important than the journey'

   Stealing scientific knowledge to become a stronger, faster, fitter athlete is
just the latest twist on the familiar theme: "that it is part of human destiny
to take advantage of all the scientific techniques that come down the pike,"
says John Hoberman, a professor at the University of Texas who has written
extensively about the ethics of sport.

   Sport used to represent a system of values for society. Now that system is
falling apart.

   "It's the scientizing of sport and the various doping and enhancement
techniques that are breaking up this consensus (value system)," he says. "I
think it's the end - elite sport culture is dying on its feet, at least as an
idealized athletic culture."

   With the fame, financial rewards and jet-set lifestyle of charismatic sports
stars splashed across newspaper and magazine pages, it's likely doping culture
will continue to permeate sport. Athletes can't be held solely responsible for
wanting to break rules in order to get ahead.

   Hoberman urges fans to put themselves in an athlete's place on the starting
line.

   "If I'm an athlete and there's this technology that will help me get an edge
and it's not detectable, wouldn't I go ahead with that technology?" he asks.
"Many or most ambitious elite athletes would."

   Although the debate is raging among scientists and academics, the athletes
themselves don't talk about doping techniques, says Crichlow. Dirty athletes
won't admit their activities, and clean athletes don't want to know what they're
up against.

   And if athletes refuse to take on the issue, doping culture will remain in
sport and genetically modified athletes will enter the arena.

   After years spent in the Olympic trenches, Crichlow believes the decision to
dope comes from a deep, almost indescribable desire to prove something to
someone.

   "For 90 per cent of the people in the world, being the best you can be
doesn't get you a gold medal," he says. "For some, the destination becomes more
important than the journey. When you dope, you start focusing on the
destination."

   And the journey is most appealing to the millions who root for their
favourite athlete. The journey creates heroes.

   Although Hoberman lauds WADA for banning gene doping, he also wonders how the
organization will regulate what can't be regulated.

   "My brilliant answer is that you can't," he says.

   Instead, he holds up one particularly human characteristic to save sport.

   "The capacity of self-restraint is really the only hope."'If all athletes are
7'6" and 350 pounds ... it becomes the circus.'

GRAPHIC:  GETTY IMAGES: ILLUSTRATION BY MARCELLE FAUCHER TORONTO STAR

LOAD-DATE: January 16, 2005


                              181 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2004 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                           September 24, 2004 Friday

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. A26

LENGTH: 881 words

HEADLINE: Top medical stars in our midst

BODY:

   Only two Canadians have ever won the Nobel Prize in Medicine. The first was
Sir Frederick Banting, who shared the 1923 award for the discovery of insulin
with a Scottish doctor working in Toronto. The second was David Hubel, a
Windsor-born neurobiologist working at Harvard, who split the 1981 prize with
two other doctors for their work on the brain.

   Canada's modest showing saddens Alan Bernstein, president of the Canadian
Institutes of Health Research. It's not that he thinks prizes are a fair measure
of medical excellence. It's just that he'd like Canadians to know how widely
respected their researchers are.

   A Toronto neurobiologist, Peter St. George-Hyslop, made one of the
groundbreaking genetic discoveries about Alzheimer's disease. An Ottawa
emergency room doctor, Ian Stiell, developed a "decision tree" that allows
physicians and nurses to determine quickly, without expensive tests, how serious
a spinal injury is. A biochemist working out of Mt. Sinai Hospital, Tony Pawson,
is attracting global attention with his work on protein interactions in the
body. Canada is on the leading edge of stem cell research.

   "Canada really punches above its weight on health research," Bernstein said.
"But how does the guy on the street know how good we are? We haven't had a Nobel
prize in medicine for years.

   "It's like Canlit," the 57-year-old scientist mused. "People didn't realize
how good our authors were till they started winning Booker prizes."

   Bernstein's job, as head of the country's premier health research funding
agency, is to ensure that talented scientists and clinicians get the support
they need to push out the boundaries of health knowledge and to ensure that
Canadians understand why their work matters.

   "We are starting to understand our bodies in ways we never did before," he
said in a recent interview. "Twenty years ago, I wouldn't have been able to tell
you the difference between a normal cell and a cancer cell. Now drugs can be
targeted to the mutation.

   "There's going to be an avalanche of new drugs and new ways of treating
diseases. We need to contribute to that revolution and benefit from it."

   Last week's first ministers' summit on health care demonstrated the
importance of evidence-based research in solving the country's health problems,
Bernstein contends. Hospital waiting lists, for instance, are a symptom of
bottlenecks in the medical system. Without understanding where those blockages
are and why they occur, policymakers have little chance of coming up with
lasting or cost-effective remedies.

   "We can't keep throwing money at health care," Bernstein said. "We have to do
things better with the resources we have."

   Similarly, ignoring the root causes of medical problems - such as the high
rate of diabetes and heart disease among aboriginal peoples - makes little
sense. "All countries with indigenous peoples are having the same problems,"
Bernstein said. "We've got to bring young aboriginal researchers into the system
and engage them in finding answers to their own problems."

   In fact, one of the 13 agencies that comes under the umbrella of the Canadian
Institutes for Health Research (CIHR) is the Aboriginal Peoples' Health
Institute in Victoria, headed by Dr. Jeff Reading, a Mohawk social scientist
whom Bernstein describes as the "Wayne Gretzky of his field."

   The other 12 institutes cover everything from cancer to mental health. Each
is headed by a top scientist in his or her discipline. The directors meet
regularly to exchange information, look for ways to collaborate and learn from
one another. "My old lab friends are amazed to hear me talking about the
socio-economic determinants of health," said Bernstein, whose specialities are
cancer research, gene therapy and haematopoiesis (the formation of blood cells.)

   When he became president of CIHR, four years ago, it had a budget of $360
million. Its allocation has now risen to $662 million. Even so, Bernstein has to
turn down 70 per cent of the research proposals he gets. He doesn't mind sending
back mediocre grant requests for more work. But it does bother him to reject
outstanding projects, knowing there is a high likelihood that talented young
researchers will leave the country.

   He reflects on that lost potential every time he walks along College Street,
watching Toronto's state-of-the-art medical and scientific research facilities
being built. He is excited about the buildings, but he can't help thinking about
all of the gifted researchers who won't be working in them. "It's like having an
art gallery without art."

   Bernstein concedes, with a wry smile, that he sounds a bit like a provincial
premier, arguing for more federal funds. But his entire budget accounts for less
than one per cent of the total cost of health care - approximately $25 per
Canadian - he points out.

   "We still invest just one-sixth of what the Americans do, on a per capita
basis. To expect a Canadian to win the Nobel Prize is like asking an athlete to
win Olympic gold with very little training."

   Sometimes such breakthroughs occur, Bernstein admits. He would be delighted
if one of his colleagues won the Nobel Prize in Medicine.

   But he would be equally proud if Canadians recognized the world-class medical
stars in their midst.

   Carol Goar's column appears Monday, Wednesday and Friday.

LOAD-DATE: September 24, 2004


                              182 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2004 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                           September 20, 2004 Monday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D05

LENGTH: 1859 words

HEADLINE: Bumps on the road to Eureka

BYLINE: Judy Steed, Toronto Star

BODY:

   This is a story about proteins - not the kind you eat, the kind you are. The
building blocks and activators of the human body.

   In case you hadn't heard, they're the Next Big Thing.

   As their mysteries are unravelled, proteins are supposed to open a treasure
chest of magical medical cures.

   Knowledge of proteins, it is said, will revolutionize the pharmaceutical
industry, enabling drugs to be brought to market faster, safer, cheaper. Win-win
all round. Good for humans, good for corporate profits.

   But Canada's leading biotech firm in the field, MDS Proteomics Inc. has a new
name, Protana Inc., and a new business plan. Having channelled more than $130
million into the firm over the last five years, including cash and tax losses,
parent company MDS Inc. has shrunk its 85 per cent stake to 48 per cent. Costs
have been cut, staff laid off, focus shifted from research to services.

   What's going on?

   "We're a solution looking for a problem," says Neil Reid, the Scottish-born
scientist and a founder of MDS Proteomics who came to Canada via NASA almost 25
years ago.

   He said the same thing back in the late 1970s, after he and a few colleagues
set up Sciex - acquired by MDS in 1981 - to produce mass spectrometers, another
"solution looking for a problem."

   In Sciex's start up years, Reid's team searched for a commercial application
for their ultra-sophisticated, high tech machines that could analyze everything
from the atmosphere on Mars to babies' breath (to detect metabolic illness). But
they couldn't figure out how to turn their mass spec technology into a
profitable business - not until a European pharmaceutical firm turned up, trying
to decipher the chemical composition of a certain substance.

   MDS Sciex did the job, and the European company was so impressed it bought
two mass spectrometers. Other pharma firms discovered how effective mass spec
machines were for drug development, and a business was born. Today, MDS Sciex is
one of the world's leading manufacturers of mass spectrometers, with 2003
revenues of $270 million, up 24 per cent over 2002.

   Can proteomics make that leap?

   Remember the promises of the "genomics revolution" ?

   In 1997, the mapping of the human body's 30,000 genes - the genome project -
was completed after an international effort that took seven years, involved
hundreds of scientists around the world, accompanied by grand visions of
transforming research into the cause and cures of disease.

   But the hype about "gene therapy" dissipated as the complexity of Mother
Nature became more apparent. Although genomics makes us aware of the vast DNA
library at our fingertips, we can't read the books, because genes are molecules
encoding all the information to make proteins - and until we understand
proteins, we're virtually illiterate.

   Produced according to coding in our genes, proteins carry out the chemical
reactions that make the body function. When the signalling goes wrong, we get
sick. Disease is disordered protein activity. And so the hunt is on, a global
detective effort that will likely cost billions before we can utilize the
intricate powers of proteins.

   It's not an easy task: There could be one million proteins to decipher, and
they're so dynamic in their existence that they change rapidly even while being
studied under mass spectrometry.

   Undaunted, Neil Reid and other scientific colleagues, including Mike Moran,
had set up MDS Proteomics in 1999. As in the Sciex model, they were ahead of
their time. But there was no question: proteins were the next frontier.

   And MDS Proteomics had a vision: personalized medicine.

   When I visited the firm's headquarters last year, chief scientific officer
Mike Moran showed off busy labs, bustling scientists, and 30 MDS Sciex mass spec
machines that cost about $1 million each.

   During 2003, staff expanded from 78 to 130. Seventy per cent were PhDs
earning in the $90,000 to $150,000 range.

   Moran was eloquent, optimistic, and dedicated to MDS Proteomics' future,
focusing on technology to develop unique "protein profiles" that could reveal
early stage disease, to be treated by medicines tailored to specific protein
activity in individuals.

   Today, many of the labs are empty, though the mass spec machines are still on
the premises. Moran is gone - back to University of Toronto and the McLaughlin
Centre for Molecular Research.

   "It was a rational decision for MDS-P to change direction and offer services
to pharma companies," says Moran, who decided to return to academia to continue
his own discovery research. He's in talks with "colleagues downtown" who, like
him, are "interested in proteomics on a big scale." They may join forces in an
as-yet unformed, university-hospital-based venture.

   Moran is bullish on the proteomics-cancer connection. "I think proteomics
will have its first big impact in the early detection of cancer and in the
development of cancer drugs."

   Meanwhile, staff levels at MDS Protana are down to 72 people, below the
pre-2003 expansion period. "We laid off technical level positions, and a lot of
those were the result of closing sites in Virginia and Denmark," says Anil
Amlani, Protana's executive vice-president. "We've kept the PhDs."

   Neil Reid is on hand - just returned from his father's funeral in Scotland -
and philosophical as ever about the ups and downs of life on the leading edge.

   He's still part of the story, heading up a division of Protana called Lead
Optimization Services. OptiMol, as he calls it, uses mass spectrometry in a
novel way to determine which small molecules will bind to proteins, either
blocking the protein or helping it operate, depending on the nature of the
disease. This "optimization" service is designed to streamline the drug
development process.

   MDS Proteomics' initial path "was too expensive and took too long," he says.
"Maybe somewhat grandiose." The field of proteomics "came out of the starting
gate with a big bang, like genomics 10 years ago. Genomics is perceived as
having let people down; it was oversold. It's a long way from understanding DNA
content to finding a new drug."

   But this is normal scientific progress: "a lot of bottlenecks" occur in the
drug discovery process, Reid says, "a lot of false starts, a lot of molecules
that fail in clinical trials. At Sciex, we hit a bottleneck, but once the
problem was solved, our 'solution' was adopted very quickly."

   Nevertheless, MDS Proteomics was not immune to restless shareholders. With no
significant revenues in sight, losses mounting and no appetite for an IPO that
had been promised in 2002 (just before the bubble burst), repositioning was the
order of the day. The company needed a name that wasn't just about proteomics,
hence Protana, which is more focused on the shorter term, Reid says, "on the
first real application (of proteomics) - biomarkers."

   Anil Amlani hangs on as executive vice-president, shepherding Protana toward
commercialization as quick as he can. He says Mike Moran "wanted to go back to
academia. He's looking at offers to head up a proteomics division at a major
institution."

   As for Amlani, "I've had to cancel my vacation three years in a row, this
industry is moving so fast."

   Fast - or frantic?

   "These have been the two toughest years in my entire career," Amlani admits,
"but we're doing something good for humanity and we'll get there. We're in the
forefront of where the whole health sciences field is going. We'll be cash-flow
positive by October 2005, and we have enough money to get there."

   "Financing is not an issue, science is not an issue, money is not an issue.
We just have to build the business. Everything we had before is still here, it's
just reshaped, refocused to build a profitable business for shareholders."

   MDS shareholders, he adds, are "very conservative. They want solid,
consistent growth." Indeed: MDS is Canada's pre-eminent, blue-chip, health
sciences company, with revenues for 2004 approaching the $2 billion mark.
Founded in 1969 by five entrepreneurial colleagues who left IBM and built the
business on laboratory services, MDS has expanded to 24 countries with 10,000
employees. It's a world leader in nuclear medicine (MDS Nordion), mass
spectrometry (MDS Sciex), clinical trials (MDS Pharma Services) and diagnostic
technology (MDS Diagnostic Services). MDS Capital Corp., founded in 1988, has $1
billion under management, with affiliates. It is a leading North American
venture capital group, focused on emerging life sciences companies.

   With its clout and experience, MDS is determined to prove its pioneering
position in proteomics right - while mollifying nervous investors.

   Amlani's perspective is that proteomics is suffering as a result of genomics.
"The genomics revolution has made enormous advances, we shouldn't forget that -
but it's come at a tremendous cost, billions of dollars, and it didn't give the
pharma companies the rewards they expected in the time frame they wanted."

   Genomics has not yet solved unmet medical needs in a commercially attractive
manner.

   So: "We have to focus proteomics on where we can get the biggest bang for our
buck."

   Biomarkers are it: "biomarkers reveal the efficacy and toxicity of drugs;
they measure how patients respond to drugs; they allow us to determine what
drugs work best in which patients; they show disease progression." Biomarkers
could come in the form of blood tests that detect specific tumours; caught
early, the cancer cells can be excised, the harm limited.

   Biomarkers could detect drug-induced kidney damage. "Biomarkers will meet
unmet medical needs," Amlani says. "They'll reduce the cost of drug development
and make medicines safer." Since 11 out of 12 new drugs fail, detecting failure
earlier cuts costs.

   Biomarkers will also be offered in conjunction with MDS Pharma Services, the
world's third-largest firm in the burgeoning field of clinical trials.

   Protana's plan is based on three business units:

   Protana Biomarker Services.

   Protana Analytical Services. An automated, robotized lab that's running 24
hours a day, seven days a week, identifying proteins. Orders come in off the
Web; physical samples arrive by truck. Clients include universities, research
labs, pharmaceutical companies who've isolated proteins but don't know what they
are.

   Protana Lead Optimization Services (OptiMol), headed by Neil Reid, to speed
up and clarify the drug development process.

   Debt holders have taken equity: 40 per cent of the company is shared equally
by the Canadian Medical Discoveries Fund and Cephalon Inc., a U.S. neuroscience
pharmaceutical firm that invested $48 million for a 5 per cent stake in 2003.

   "Nature is extremely complicated," says Reid. "As humans, we tend to simplify
things. I'm in awe of the complexity of it all."

   There will be a 'Eureka' moment, he says. "There will be a slow curve, then
the avalanche will hit."

   Watch for it.

   Reach Judy Steed

   at jsteed @ thestar.ca

   'These have been the two toughest years in my entire caree,r but we're doing
something good for humanity and we'll get there. We're in the forefront of where
the whole health sciences field is going'

   'The genomics revolution has made enormous advances, we shouldn't forget that
- but it's come at a tremendous cost, billions of dollars'

GRAPHIC:  Charla Jones toronto star Protana Inc. vice-presidents Shane Climie,
left, and Neil Reid in the labs of the company that has gone through a complex
evolution. MDS Inc. has shrunk its stake.

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 2004


                              186 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2004 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                            August 14, 2004 Saturday

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. L07

LENGTH: 362 words

HEADLINE: Workaholic gene therapy holds promise for mentally ill

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   Procrastinating monkeys turned into workaholics when a gene treatment
prevented them from knowing how much work they had to do to get a reward.

   U.S. government researchers found monkeys work harder at a task - and were
better at it - when a key brain compound, dopamine, was blocked.

   Like humans, monkeys tend to wait until the last possible minute to finish up
the work, and become very adept at estimating how long they have. Dopamine, a
message-carrying chemical associated with rewards, movement and a variety of
other important functions, is the key to this kind of perception.

   Barry Richmond and colleagues at the National Institute of Mental Health used
a new genetic technique to block the D2 gene, which makes a receptor for
dopamine.

   "The gene knockdown triggered a remarkable transformation in the simian work
ethic," Richmond said in a statement Wednesday. "Like many of us, monkeys
normally slack off initially in working toward a distant goal."

   The NIMH team said they are hoping to understand mental illness.

   "In this case, it's worth noting that the ability to associate work with
reward is disturbed in mental disorders, including schizophrenia, mood disorders
and obsessive-compulsive disorder, so our finding of the pivotal role played by
this gene and circuit may be of clinical interest," Richmond said.

   "For example, people who are depressed often feel nothing is worth the work.
People with obsessive-compulsive disorder work incessantly; even when they get
rewarded they feel they must repeat the task. In mania, people will work
feverishly for rewards that aren't worth the trouble to most of us."

   For their study, Richmond and colleague used seven rhesus monkeys who had to
push a lever in response to visual cues on a projection screen, and got a drop
of water as a reward.

   "They work more efficiently - make fewer errors - as they get closer to being
rewarded," Richmond said. "But without the dopamine receptor, they consistently
stayed on-task and made few errors, because they could no longer learn to use
visual cues to predict how their work was going to get them a reward."

   Results were published in the Proceedings Of The National Academy Of
Sciences.

LOAD-DATE: August 14, 2004


                              187 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2004 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                            August 12, 2004 Thursday

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. A22

LENGTH: 717 words

HEADLINE: Reasons to back gene research

BODY:

   Firms and staff can help save lives with donation, says Dr. Ron Woznow

   A few years ago Eyal Grunebaum, a research physician at Toronto's Hospital
for Sick Children, was confronted with a doctor's worst nightmare; a dying child
he could not save.

   The 4-year-old boy had Purine Nucleoside Phosphorylase deficiency (PNP), a
rare genetic disease that affects the immune systems of fewer than one in three
million children. As diseases go, that's extremely uncommon. There are only
about 200 cases worldwide, of which six are in Canada. Patients, who once had to
live in germ-free "bubbles," but now have sterile rooms, usually die before they
are 10 years old from infections or malignant tumours.

   Replacing the immune system with bone marrow from a genetically identical
donor has been tried in some children, but for this particular patient even that
was not an option.

   Thus, he had a disease with no cure and until recently, little hope.

   As a pediatrician, Grunebaum understood the anguish of his young patient's
parents as they urged the medical team to do anything they could to save their
son. But as a research immunologist, he knew that there was little to offer.

   In the absence of an effective treatment, the child's death was inevitable,
but not totally without purpose. It helped strengthen Grunebaum's commitment to
finding a treatment for PNP. In spite of its rarity, he believed no family
should face the prospect of losing a child to the disease just because no one
had found a cure.

   Earlier this year, Grunebaum was awarded $40,000 by the Canadian Gene Cure
Foundation to continue his research into PNP. Cynics may say that the money
would have been better spent on diseases that impact more people. But in reality
that happens anyway. Any breakthroughs in Grunebaum's laboratory are likely to
apply to much more than just PNP.

   PNP deficiency is a disease caused by a defect in a single gene. It mainly
affects immune cells in the blood, making it ideal for treatment with gene
therapy, which is also seen as a suitable treatment for many other more common
genetic diseases. So Grunebaum's PNP research could result in discoveries with
far wider benefits.

   That's why the foundation is committed to allocating half its annual research
grants to "orphan" genetic diseases, so-called because they affect fewer than
one in 10,000 people and are often overlooked by the scientific community.
Approximately 6,000 orphan genetic diseases have been identified.

   Genetic disease is passed on from our parents. Single gene disorders, such as
cystic fibrosis and hemophilia, result from mutations in a parent's DNA.

   This year the foundation will again be looking for suitable recipients for
our genetic research grants and we hope to have even more money available for
this important work.

   Our funding is raised through our annual Jeans for Genes Day campaign in
which companies across Canada are asked to support our work through donations.

   Individuals within companies are encouraged to support us by buying a Jeans
for Genes Day pin in the shape of a double helix (representing DNA, the basic
building block of genes) for a minimum donation of $5 and the opportunity to
wear jeans to work on Jeans for Genes Day, which this year is on Sept. 23.

   Every dollar raised goes to research funding.

   One of the challenges we face in raising funds is getting people to
understand the true magnitude of genetic diseases and therefore appreciating the
urgent need for more research.

   It is estimated that three out of five Canadians will eventually suffer from
a genetic disease. Many are more common such as juvenile diabetes, dyslexia,
Alzheimer's disease, breast and colon cancers and epilepsy. Others are rare and
have strange names such as Williams-Bueren syndrome, Fanconi anemia,
Niemann-Pick disease and progeria.

   All are tragic for patients and families and a drain on society both
financially and emotionally. That's why it is so important to keep funding
research into treatments and cures.

   Dr. Ron Woznow is president of the Vancouver-based Canadian Gene Cure
Foundation, a registered Canadian charitable organization. Companies and
individuals interested in learning more about the benefits of participating in
Jeans for Genes Day should contact Megan Airton at the foundation, 604-224-1010
or visit www.jeansforgenes.ca.

LOAD-DATE: August 12, 2004


                              191 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2004 Sun Media Corporation
                      London Free Press (Ontario, Canada)

                       July 30, 2004 Friday Early Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A10

LENGTH: 302 words

HEADLINE: DNA STRUCTURE DISCOVERER DIES

BYLINE: BY AP

DATELINE: SAN DIEGO

BODY:

   Nobel Prize-winning scientist Francis Crick, who with James Watson discovered
the spiral "double-helix" structure of DNA, paving the way for everything from
DNA blood tests to genetically engineered tomatoes, has died. He was 88.

   Crick died Wednesday at University of California-San Diego's Thornton
Hospital, said Brendolyn Williams, a spokesperson for the Salk Institute, the
research body where Crick worked. He had been battling colon cancer.

   It was in 1953, while working in Cambridge, England, that the British-born
Crick, then 36, and American-born Watson, 24, hit upon the famous double-helix
structure -- like a twisted ladder -- of deoxyribonucleic acid, or DNA.

   Not until years later were their conclusions about the molecular structure of
DNA firmly established. At the time, Crick later said, only a small number of
people "even thought it was interesting."

   A half-century later, the biotechnology industry is based largely upon the
discovery. So, too, are genetically engineered foods and innovative medical
technologies such as gene therapy.

   Law enforcement agencies now routinely collect and test DNA from crime
scenes, either to convict the guilty or set the innocent free. Social issues
such as whether to have children are now often affected by expanded knowledge of
DNA and its role in heredity.

   The two were awarded the Nobel Prize in physiology or medicine in 1962.

   In a statement yesterday, Watson hailed Crick "for his extraordinarily
focused intelligence and for the many ways he showed me kindness and developed
my self-confidence.

   "He treated me as though I were a member of his family. Being with him for
two years in a small room in Cambridge was truly a privilege. I always looked
forward to being with him and speaking to him, up until the moment of his
death."

GRAPHIC: photo of FRANCIS CRICK

LOAD-DATE: July 30, 2004


                              192 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2004 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                              July 30, 2004 Friday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A03

LENGTH: 753 words

HEADLINE: 'Secret of life' pioneer dies

BYLINE: Michelle Morgante, Associated Press

DATELINE: SAN DIEGO

BODY:

   Nobel Prize-winning scientist Francis Crick co-discovered the spiral
"double-helix" structure of DNA in 1953 and opened the way for everything from
gene-spliced crops and medicines to DNA fingerprinting and the genetic detection
of diseases.

   Crick died Wednesday at the age of 88 after a battle with colon cancer,
according to the Salk Institute, the research body where Crick worked in recent
years.

   The British-born Crick was 36 and working at the University of Cambridge's
Cavendish Laboratory in 1953 when he and the American-born James Watson, just
24, struck upon the idea that the DNA molecule resembles a twisted ladder.

   After making the discovery, Crick walked into a Cambridge pub and announced
he and Watson had "found the secret of life." But only a few people at the time
"even thought it was interesting," Crick once said, and it took years before the
groundbreaking discovery was firmly accepted.

   Decades later, the discovery's impact can be seen everywhere. It laid the
foundation for the biotechnology industry, enabling scientists to engineer
bigger tomatoes, doctors to pursue gene therapy to treat disease, and police to
solve crimes through DNA evidence.

   Biotechnology is a $30-billion-a-year industry that has produced some 160
drugs and vaccines, treating everything from breast cancer to diabetes. Seven
million farmers in 18 countries grew genetically engineered crops last year,
allowing them to grow food with fewer pesticides.

   "It's almost too difficult to pay him high enough tribute for what he
contributed," said Stanford University scientist Paul Berg, who won the Nobel in
chemistry in 1980 for his pioneering work with genetic engineering.

   Crick's work "helped to usher in a golden age of molecular biology," said
Lord May of Oxford, president of Britain's academy of scientists, the Royal
Society.

   Crick and Watson were awarded the Nobel in medicine in 1962.

   Watson's 1968 best seller The Double Helix told how he and Crick used bits of
wire, coloured beads, sheet metal and cardboard cut-outs to construct a 3-D
model of the molecule.

   Deoxyribonucleic acid, or DNA, is made up of four chemical building blocks,
known as "bases." Each "rung" in the twisted ladder is made up of two bases, and
the various combinations of bases and the order in which the rungs are arranged
spell out the information stored in genes.

   Building on their work and that of others over the decades, scientists can
now alter genes to breed out disease and breed in desired traits.

   That newfound power has stirred ethical debates, but Crick said there was no
way in the 1950s that he could have foretold modern DNA developments.

   "Think of the effect television has had worldwide on politics," he said. "You
can't possibly expect the man who invented the transistor to have seen that."

   In a statement yesterday, Watson hailed Crick "for his extraordinarily
focused intelligence and for the many ways he showed me kindness and developed
my self-confidence."

   "He treated me as though I were a member of his family," Watson said. "Being
with him for two years in a small room in Cambridge was truly a privilege. I
always looked forward to being with him and speaking to him, up until the moment
of his death."

   In person, Crick was provocative, quick-witted and charming, though he rarely
consented to interviews. He was averse to attention of any sort, he said, not
because he was anti-social but because it cut into his thinking time.

   Unlike many scientists, Crick did not spend his days toiling in a lab or
instructing students. Instead, he read and mused in his Salk Institute office
overlooking the Pacific Ocean, putting in full days well beyond retirement age.
He had come to Salk after resigning from the Cambridge faculty in 1977.

   Watson and Crick benefited from work by researchers Maurice Wilkins and
Rosalind Franklin of King's College in London. Wilkins shared the Nobel with the
two men; Franklin died in 1958. Nobel prizes are not awarded posthumously.

   Francis Harry Compton Crick was born in Northampton, England, in 1916 to a
shoe factory owner and his wife, who bought their young son a children's
encyclopedia to help answer his many science questions. He studied physics at
University College of London and then built underwater mines for the British
government during World War II.

   After the war, Crick became interested in "the division between the living
and the non-living" and decided to teach himself biology and chemistry.

   Crick is survived by his wife, artist Odile Speed, three children and four
grandchildren.

GRAPHIC:  DANIEL MORDZINSKI afp getty images Nobel prize winner Francis Crick,
seen in Paris in 1993, died Wednesday in San Diego where he had been battling
cancer. After making his ground-breaking discovery, Crick walked into a
Cambridge pub and announced he and Watson had "found the secret of life.'' AP
Photo Dr. Francis Crick, left, and Dr. James Watson, co-discoverers of the
double-helix structure of DNA, pose in Cambridge, England, in this undated photo
courtesy of PBS.AP Photo Dr. Francis Crick, left, and Dr. James Watson,
co-discoverers of the double-helix structure of DNA, pose in Cambridge, England,
in this undated photo courtesy of PBS.

LOAD-DATE: July 30, 2004


                              193 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2004 Sun Media Corporation
                      London Free Press (Ontario, Canada)

                       July 26, 2004 Monday Final Edition

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. B2

LENGTH: 358 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY IS NEXT ABUSE;
CHASING THE CHEATERS

BYLINE: BY JIM KERNAGHAN, FREE PRESS SPORTS COLUMNIST

BODY:

   There's a frightening new kid on the performance-enhancing block.

   It sounds like science fiction but gene therapy, if the cheats in sports are
able to harness it, could make all the stimulants and steroids look like child's
play.

   Imagine this: A shot putter steps up and rockets the iron ball 40 metres. Or
a field goal kicker thumps one between the uprights from 80 yards. Or a high
jumper clears three metres.

   The potential for a new wave of sports cheating isn't far away via genetic
engineering, it appears.

   Researchers have used gene therapy experiments to promote exceptional muscle
growth in mice and rats, such as powerful shoulders and haunches, and it can be
replicated in humans. The research is designed to benefit the elderly and those
with muscle-wasting diseases but sports applications are obvious.

   The therapy produces increased levels of IGF-1, an insulin-like growth factor
and a protein that promotes muscle growth and repair. Lab rats showed a
35-per-cent strength gain in targeted muscles and didn't lose any of it when
experiments at the University of Pennsylvania ceased.

   "I wouldn't be surprised if somebody (in sports) is trying it as we speak,"
said University of Western Ontario genetics expert Dr. Shiva Singh. "If you can
do it for a diseased muscle, why can't you do it for a normal muscle?"

   University of Pennsylvania's Lee Sweeney, chair of the physiology department,
said researchers have been inundated with calls from weight-lifters and body
builders. Even a high school football coach wanted his team treated.

   He says it's an easy process for, say, a strengthened leg.

   "I would put the whole leg on bypass," he said. "I would isolate the leg and
put in the virus through the blood. This is nothing a vascular surgeon couldn't
do."

   Here's the scary part from the standpoint of those seeking to weed out the
cheats: It would be hard to detect.

   Gene therapy would not be detectable through the normal tests -- blood, urine
or saliva samples -- only through muscle biopsies.

   Like steroids, gene therapy was designed for medical purposes.

   And like steroids, it opens the door for athletic abuse.

LOAD-DATE: July 26, 2004


                              196 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2004 Sun Media Corporation
                      London Free Press (Ontario, Canada)

                       June 4, 2004 Friday Final Edition

SECTION: OPINION PAGES; Pg. A11

LENGTH: 1084 words

HEADLINE: HOSPITAL REALLY ABOUT KIDS;
A DOCTOR INVOLVED IN LONDON'S SELECTION AS THE SITE FOR A NEW SHRINERS HOSPITAL
SAYS THE CITY WAS CHOSEN STRICTLY ON ITS MERITS AND RECENT PROTESTS FROM
MONTREAL ARE OUT OF LINE.

BYLINE: BY DR. CECIL H. RORABECK, SPECIAL TO THE FREE PRESS

BODY:

   As a member of the committee involved in attracting the Shriners hospital to
London, I'm somewhat perplexed and disappointed by remarks attributed to
colleagues, civic leaders and other health-care professionals in Montreal. These
comments, in my view, have been counterproductive and unprofessional and have
done little to enhance either city's reputation.

   It's important that individuals on both sides of this issue understand the
process involved in attracting the Shriners hospital to London.

   About 3 1/2 years ago, I was contacted by the medical director of the
Shriners Hospital for Children in Tampa, Fla., who indicated the Shriners were
looking for alternative sites for their hospital in Montreal. London was among
four alternative sites being considered.

   The reason other sites were being considered, I was told, was that the
Montreal facility was inadequate from a facilities point of view and would have
to be rebuilt. They were considering other options and locations with regard to
the possibility of rebuilding in Montreal, but they were also considering other
cities, London included.

   The reason they were considering London, and the reason I was approached,
related to the outstanding reputation this city has as a medical centre.

   From these initial discussions, several site visits were made to our city
(and to the other cities, including Montreal).

   In addition to looking at the proposed location for the hospital, its
relationship to London Health Sciences Centre, airport facilities, commitment of
the city and so on, the single overriding consideration for the Shriners was our
ability to care for children with musculoskeletal disorders.

   It became apparent to their medical director and their board, following
several visits to London, that not only did the city and the University of
Western Ontario enjoy an international reputation in medical care and medical
research, but also that the university, the Lawson Research Institute and the
Robarts Research Institute were high-powered research facilities with a
commitment to skeletal biology, imaging, molecular biology and gene therapy --
all of which were extremely attractive from the Shriners' point of view.

   The world-class reputations enjoyed by the aforementioned institutions are
indeed world-class, and something that would ultimately enhance the Shriners
hospital's own research capabilities.

   An important component of the Shriners Hospital for Children is orthopedic
research, and an equally important part of that research would be the ability of
individuals working at the Shriners hospital to collaborate with individuals at
UWO, LHRI, Robarts and LHSC.

   The board of the Shrine and their medical directors and advisers saw this
potential for collaboration here in London to be most extraordinary and unique.

   Notwithstanding that, patient care is what the Shriners Hospital for Children
is all about, irrespective of location, and it is important to consider why
London was chosen over other cities in that area.

   All Shriners hospitals for children are specialty-based facilities, dealing
only with children's orthopedic problems and/or children's burns. As a result,
it is essential that any future hospital be located in close proximity to a
facility that has multi-specialty, interdisciplinary capabilities, so that in
the event of consultations being required, the expertise would be readily and
quickly available.

   London once again was looked upon very favourably, because of the possibility
to geographically locate and operationally integrate the Shriners hospital with
LHSC and the Children's Hospital of Western Ontario. The board recognized the
importance of this and has continued to see that relationship as integral to the
planning and success of its future facility in London.

   We are indeed fortunate in London to have a world-class orthopedic surgery
department, a major component of which is our pediatric orthopedic surgical
care.

   Throughout the various Shriner visits to London, an extraordinary amount of
due diligence was done to satisfy the Shriners that London, indeed, did have the
clinical and operational capabilities to support a Shriners hospital in
juxtaposition to LHSC. At the end of the day, they were extremely impressed by
our ability to integrate and deliver these services to their hospital.

   Other factors that were considered by the board of the Shrine have been well
described in the press and I won't dwell on them in detail.

   Suffice it to say, however, that they were extremely impressed with the
commitment of London as a city, by its leaders both in the municipal government
and at the university, as well as its leaders in health care.

   They sensed, quite correctly in my opinion, the entire city of London was
behind this venture and would continue to support it.

   As a result of several site visits, numerous phone calls and e-mails, as well
as at least three visits on our part to Shrine headquarters in Tampa or to their
annual board meeting, the Shrine board of directors voted unanimously in April
to move the hospital to London.

   This decision needs to be ratified by the general membership of the Shrine,
and it was expected that ratification would occur in July.

   Unfortunately, the group in Montreal has suddenly realized it is in danger of
losing its hospital, which, as I indicated, has to be rebuilt in any event.

   This has led to a frenzy of activity in the media, with comments attributed
to individuals in Montreal that are inaccurate, derogatory and, most of all,
unprofessional.

   The Shriners Hospital for Children -- irrespective of its location in London,
or Greenville, S.C., for that matter -- is not about ethnicity, is not about
geography or language, nor is it about the cost of housing or the commute time
to and from work.

   Rather, it is about excellence in pediatric orthopedic patient care and
musculoskeletal research. It is about caring and compassion in looking after
children with musculoskeletal ailments.

   The board of directors of the Shriners Hospital for Children chose London
because of our medical excellence in these areas.

   It is important for all of us to remember that London was chosen as the site
for this hospital for the positive reasons mentioned above. It is also important
that we, as a community, take the high road in our discussions and publications
and continue to focus on orthopedic and research excellence, and not lower the
level of discussion to the depths recently reported in the media.

GRAPHIC: photo by Dave Chidley, The London Free Press; A GOOD FIT: Dr. Cecil
Rorabeck, a professor of orthopedic surgery at the University of Western Ontario
and site chief, surgery, at LHSC's University campus, believes the Shriners
children's hospital is a good fit for London.

LOAD-DATE: June 4, 2004


                              197 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2004 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                             May 15, 2004 Saturday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A23

LENGTH: 1815 words

HEADLINE: Message in a test tube

BYLINE: Olivia Ward, Toronto Star

BODY:

   Should scientists have free rein to build "designer babies" from human
clones? Do stem cells harvested from human embryos herald new hope for deadly
diseases, or downgrade the sanctity of life? Should the Bible, or biology, be
the benchmark of children's education?

   Ever since science began to penetrate the innermost secrets of human
existence, believers have been uneasy that God would take a back seat to
scientific progress. But in the 21st century, scientific advances and religious
resurgence have been on a collision course.

   This weekend, international academics are gathering in Toronto to debate the
moral issues of science, as it grapples with religionists who vow that only God
can set standards for human behaviour, and skeptics who worry that scientific
research is spiralling out of control.

   "Half a century ago, science had enormous prestige," says McGill University
philosopher and physicist Mario Bunge. "Now, that is declining. Scientists have
not explained themselves very well to the public. This is a golden opportunity
to restore the balance."

   Bunge, with American humanist philosopher Paul Kurtz, was to deliver the
keynote address of the weekend conference, "Science and Ethics: How Scientific
Inquiry Helps Frame Value Judgments."

   Kurtz heads the Center for Inquiry International, which organized the
conference. And, he says, "the interface between science and ethics has moved to
the centre of controversy in many parts of the world, including Canada. Great
breakthroughs are being made now, and the frontiers of science are expanding.
But the movement toward censorship is also growing."

   In the United States, a backlash against the secular sciences has been
building for more than a decade, since Patrick Buchanan, a prophet of the
Republican religious right, first sounded the alarm: "There is a religious war
going on in our country for the soul of America. It is a cultural war, as
critical to the kind of a nation we will one day be as was the Cold War itself."

   Under President George W. Bush, Christian religious radicalism has made large
strides, even in academia. Evangelical groups have taken root from small
provincial colleges to the liberal Ivy League. At the same time, creationists,
who oppose the theory of evolution, have transported their beliefs to some
state-based school curricula. In Florida, creationists have set up a biblical
theme park to oppose Disney World's evolution-based historical displays.

   U.S. surveys show that up to 75 per cent of Americans favour the return of
Christian prayers to public schools, and most support the Pledge of Allegiance,
declaring America "one nation under God."

   The Bush administration's opposition to abortion, sex education, and types of
scientific research has had far-reaching consequences for funding of social,
scientific and medical programs. Bush's chief adviser on bioethics, Leon Kass,
has argued that any attempt to "manufacture life" is evil.

   The U.S. Congress, too, recently passed laws banning both cloning and stem
cell research. Scientists fear the back-to-religion trend could intensify as the
2004 presidential election approaches.

   "Secularism has become a dirty word," says Susan Jacoby, author of
Freethinkers: A History of American Secularism. "Democrats are being warned that
they do not have a chance of winning the presidential election unless they adopt
a posture of religious 'me-too-ism' to convince voters their politics are
grounded in values just as sacred as those proclaimed by President Bush."

   In Canada, religion is a less pervasive issue. According to a recent survey
by the Washington-based Pew Research Center for the People and the Press, only
30 per cent of Canadians consider it "important" to their lives, about half the
number who declared themselves devotees in the U.S.

   Though in an increasingly diverse society Christian conservatism has made
little impact, a bill to ban human cloning was passed two months ago over the
objections of many Canadian scientists.

   In Britain, which has a long tradition of religious skepticism, religion is
making a modest comeback. Secular schools are responding to parental demands for
more "Christian values" by converting to Church of England curricula, which
teach basic subjects, but emphasize ethics and discipline.

   Australia too has seen an upswing in private schools, many of them
religiously-based and teaching Anglican, Catholic or Islamic doctrines. In the
past five years the federal government has spent more money on private schools
than on university education.

   The outcome of the religious revivals, scientists fear, may be further doubts
about the validity of science, and more attempts to control or limit research on
religious grounds.

   "The coming decades promise to be both the best and the worst of times for
the evolutionary disciplines," says University of Georgia geneticist John Avise,
in the journal BioScience.

   While huge advances have been made in mapping the human genome, understanding
patterns of genetic inheritance, developing gene therapy for serious diseases
and launching research into eliminating future genetic diseases, they are also
setting the scene for a potential clash with those who would curtail such
studies on moral grounds.

   "Fundamental research of this type may well lead the field of evolutionary
genetics further into realms that some philosophers and theologians might prefer
science left unexplored," warns Avise.

   However, says Kurtz, it's time that scientists and philosophers applied
themselves to solving ethical problems, rather than abandoning the field to
those who would make judgments on religious grounds.

   "Does morality depend on religion, as is commonly held?" he asks. "Theists
insist that without religious foundations, anything goes, and social chaos will
ensue. But secular societies have already developed responsible ethical norms,
and science and reason have helped us to solve moral dilemmas. How that can be
done may well be the hottest issue of the 21st century."

   In the U.S., which is the largest source of scientific research funds, Kurtz
says, the belief that "God alone provides us with absolute commandments is
virtually official doctrine."

   But he points out, acting on purely religious grounds also carries dangers,
including the violence perpetrated in past religious wars, and the terrorism
associated with modern-day extremists who have killed innocent people in the
name of Islam.

   On the other hand, those who take the "postmodern" view that there are no
real standards, but only tastes and opinions, are also mistaken, Kurtz adds.

   "If we accept cultural relativity as our guide, we would have no grounds to
object to laws that condone the stoning to death of adulteresses," he says.

   In the search for a new system of ethics, scientists could look to values
that are related to human interests, needs and desires, but are also open to
scientific evaluation, he suggests. That is already common practice in the
fields of medicine, social psychology, economics, political science and many
other disciplines.

   In many countries, however, highly knowledgable scientists have been
criticized for arrogance in promoting the development of new products that could
potentially damage humans and the environment.

   And, says Argentine-born Bunge, both philosophers and scientists have often
been slow to take in the big picture of massive threats to the earth and its
future, convincing some people that they are incapable of ethical judgments.

   "The biggest problems we should be confronting are overpopulation and the
inability of most of mankind to lead dignified lives. Philosophers, especially,
live sheltered lives. Most have never been to the Third World and they've never
really seen misery and hopelessness. That's not the way to approach real ethical
problems."

   To overcome those objections, Kurtz says, scientists must take into
consideration human realities, but be ready to challenge values that are based
on faith, custom or tradition: a system he calls "naturalistic ethics."

   In the case of cloning, he says, it's necessary to examine the two main
objections - that it is unsafe at this stage of technology, because infants
could be born with serious health problems; and that it is immoral to "design"
children.

   "If it were to become safe, proponents argue, it could have enormous
benefits, like curing Parkinson's disease, Alzheimer's, or juvenile diabetes.
Opponents on moral grounds claim it is tampering with humans who are possessed
of souls from the moment of conception."

   The debate on the human soul, Kurtz admits, is a difficult if not insoluble
one. However, he says, in addition to questioning whether "small collections of
cells are sentient beings," scientists could argue that human beings are already
being modified at head-spinning rates that are quite different from "nature's
plan" dating back to biblical times.

   "We wear false teeth, eyeglasses, and hearing aids. We sport hair grafts,
pacemakers, organ transplants, artificial limbs. We undergo transgender
operations and injections. We use Viagra to enhance sexual potency, take
mega-vitamins and hormone therapy. Why not go further?"

   But, he says, a dogmatic approach to scientific ethics, whether religiously
or academically based, will not be productive or lead to progress.

   "The best corrective is some skepticism and a willingness to engage in
ethical inquiry, not only about others' moral zeal, but about our own,
especially if we are tempted to translate the results of our own ethical or
scientific inquiries into commandments.

   For in recognizing our own fallibility we can learn to tolerate other human
beings, and appreciate their diversity and plurality of lifestyles."

   However, for some rationalists and believers, the line is already drawn in
the scientific sand. They believe that the debate will become more bitter in the
future, as those with entrenched views face off across new areas of science.

   The Nobel laureate Francis Crick, co-discoverer of the structure of DNA,
recently announced in the journal Nature Neuroscience that he has discovered the
cells in the human brain that are responsible for creating an individual's
unique sense of self.

   "For the first time we have a coherent scheme for the neural correlates of
consciousness in philosophical, psychological and neural terms," he said, a
claim that directly challenges religious believers who contend that perception
and personality are properties of the human soul. Without belief in a divine
hand, they argue, mankind will become truly dehumanized.

   "You, your joys and your sorrows, your memories and your ambitions, your
sense of personal identity and free will," Crick wrote in an earlier essay on
the thought process, "are in fact no more than the behaviour of a vast assembly
of nerve cells and their associated molecules."

   'The coming decades promise to be both the best and the worst of times for
the evolutionary disciplines.'

GRAPHIC:  ILLUSTRATION BY RAFFI ANDERIAN TORONTO STAR

LOAD-DATE: May 15, 2004


                              201 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2004 Sun Media Corporation
                      London Free Press (Ontario, Canada)

                     April 24, 2004 Saturday Final Edition

SECTION: CITY & REGION; Pg. A12

LENGTH: 228 words

HEADLINE: SEVEN LONDON CHARITABLE FOUNDATIONS COMPARED

BYLINE: BY THE LONDON FREE PRESS

BODY:

   The Free Press examined the 2000, 2001 and 2002 financial statements of seven
public foundations in the London area. Tax returns for 2003 are not all
available on the Canada Revenue Agency website.

   Revenues (aside from investment income), money spent on charity work and
costs for the three years each were added to give a snapshot of how each
foundation uses its money. A note of caution: Each foundation prepares its
financial statements differently. That may affect some comparisons. Assets
include investment funds, buildings and other fixed assets.

   Revenue Money spent Administration Assets at

   on charity workfundraising costs year end 2002

   Children's Health Foundation $12 million $8.5 million $5.8 million $15
million

   Bethany's Hope Foundation$2.1 million $1.4 million $120,000 $868,000

   London Community Foundation $3.87 million $2.35 million $1 million $20
million

   Monsignor Feeney Foundation

   for Catholic Schools $1.44 million $697,000 $549,000 $2 million

   St. Joe's Health Care Foundation of London $15 million$2.99 million $5
million $26.9 million

   VON Middlesex-Elgin Foundation $1.17 million $690,000 $277,000 $825,000

   Jesse's Journey -- Foundation

   for Cell and Gene Therapy $2 million $333,116 $1.2 million $3.45 million

LOAD-DATE: April 24, 2004


                              203 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2004 Sun Media Corporation
                      London Free Press (Ontario, Canada)

                     April 22, 2004 Thursday Final Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D1

LENGTH: 599 words

HEADLINE: LERNERS CELEBRATES 75TH YEAR WITH BUSINESS, CARING AWARDS

BYLINE: BY NORMAN DE BONO, FREE PRESS BUSINESS REPORTER

BODY:

   It seems fitting in the year Lerners celebrates its 75th year, the London law
firm is honoured with business achievement and caring awards.

   After all, says Mike Lerner, good business and community compassion have
marked the law firm, one of London's oldest and largest, since it was formed in
1929 by his uncle, Mayer Lerner.

   How else do you explain its rapid growth to about 100 lawyers and the fact it
contributes more than 12,000 hours a year to volunteer service to the community,
he asks.

   "It has always been the philosophy of this firm to serve the community and
that started with my father and uncle," said Lerner. "Back in those days,
starting a law firm was not a guaranteed road to success, to be a young Jewish
lawyer in London at the time was not necessarily the easiest thing."

   Lerners won the London Chamber of Commerce Workforce of the Future award in
March and on May 4 will receive a 2004 Caring Award from the United Way of
London and Middlesex.

   "Lerners is involved with so many organizations, from Meals On Wheels,
Children's Health Foundation and the Grand Theatre, to name a few," said Glen
Mitchell, executive director of Big Brothers, which nominated Lerners.

   "They have the attitude they are part of the community and should give to the
community. People see law firms and they think there are big bucks there and
nothing comes out, but at Lerners there is no question it does."

   It won the business award because it has supported workers other businesses
may consider "on the fringe," said Gerry Macartney, chamber general manager.
"They have reached out and extended work opportunities to those who may need
help, who are challenged, they promote those kinds of employees."

   "If there is any kind of event, don't be surprised to find Lerners behind it,
there is tremendous support from them in both their dollars and human
resources."

   The firm's tradition of community work is rooted in its past. Samuel Lerner,
Michael's father, joined the law firm in 1945 upon returning from the Second
World War, where he served with the Royal Canadian Regiment. When he died in
2000, he enjoyed the rank of lieutenant-colonel.

   Even before that, Lerner's grandfather -- a coal merchant -- donated coal to
the Christian Women's Association for heat and a Lerner family member still sits
on the YWCA board today.

   As for the business side, the firm's greatest growth came in the mid-1980s
when it grew to about 20 lawyers and decided in 1985 to open a Toronto office
with senior partner Earl Cherniak.

   "What sets Lerners apart from other local law firms is there have been no
mergers. All our growth has been internal. That offers excellent opportunities
for young persons coming on board," Lerner said, adding the firm expects to soon
add about four articling students to its staff.

   "A lot of young lawyers today see this as a business, and it is a business,
but when you become a lawyer you are called to the bar, and I think we have to
return to that idea, that this is a calling, a profession, not just a business."

   Among its other achievements, the firm's managing partner, Janet Stewart, has
been instrumental in establishing Big Sisters in London and it has raised more
than $300,000 for gene therapy research, Lerner added.

   Lerners will formally celebrate its 75th anniversary later this year and one
of the things it will do, in September, is hold a street party in front of its
Dufferin Avenue office. Also, it will offer free public lectures through the
London Public Library on legal issues such as how to make a will and how to hire
a lawyer.

GRAPHIC: 2 photos; 1. photo by Derek Ruttan, The London Free Press; TRIPLE
CELEBRATION: Michael Lerner of Lerners, one of London's oldest and largest law
firms marking its 75th year, is happy its business achievement and community
caring are being honoured.; 2. photo of GLEN MITCHELL

LOAD-DATE: April 22, 2004


                              206 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2004 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                     April 18, 2004 Sunday Ontario Edition

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. E08

LENGTH: 541 words

HEADLINE: Sports Digest

BYLINE: Bloomberg News

BODY:

   CLEVELAND Basketball

   LeBron to be named

   Rookie of the Year,

   NBA sources say

   LeBron James will be named the National Basketball Association's Rookie of
the Year, becoming the first player in Cleveland Cavaliers history to win the
award, people familiar with the voting told .

   James, the No. 1 pick in last year's draft, finished ahead of Carmelo
Anthony, the third pick who plays for the Denver Nuggets.

   NBA spokesman Tim Frank, Cavaliers spokesman Tad Carper and James's agent,
Eric Goodwin, declined to comment. The NBA said it will announce the winner of
the award, which is voted on by the media, on Tuesday.

   Kings' guard Jackson

   could be done for year

   Guard Bobby Jackson will miss the Sacramento Kings' playoff opener today
against Dallas because of the abdominal injury that has bothered him for two
months.

   Jackson, the NBA's top sixth man last season, missed 28 of the Kings' final
29 regular-season games with a strained muscle in his abdomen.

   He was activated from the injured list earlier this month, but coach Rick
Adelman isn't certain whether the point guard will play again this season. "We
were really hoping he was going to be able to play, but I don't think you're
going to see him," Adelman said.

   Tennis

   Venus headed to final

   after beating Kostanic

   Venus Williams beat Jelena Kostanic of Croatia 6-4, 6-1 yesterday to reach
the final of the Family Circle Cup.

   Williams, playing in her first semifinal of the year, struggled with unforced
errors in the first set but had no trouble in the second set. In today's final,
she will face Spain's Conchita Martinez, who defeated Switzerland's Patty
Schnyder.

   Auto Racing

   Wheldon dominates

   Japan Indy race

   Dan Wheldon won the Indy Japan 300 yesterday for his first IRL victory and
Honda's first Indy-car win on its home track.

   Wheldon, the 2003 Indy Racing League rookie of year, started from the pole
and led 192 of 200 laps on the 11/2-mile Twin Ring Motegi circuit.

   Wheldon averaged 166.114 m.p.h. in a race slowed by three cautions. His
Andretti Green Racing teammate, Tony Kanaan of Brazil, finished second, 1.4454
seconds back.

   Drugs

   Athletes could cheat

   with gene therapy

   Athletes and coaches will soon turn to gene therapy in an attempt to gain a
performance edge, scientists told an international workshop yesterday.

   Though the idea of manipulating genes to enhance performance has been around
for more than a decade, it gained attention this year after a University of
Pennsylvania study showed that muscle mass, strength and endurance in rats can
be increased by altering their genes.

   Hockey

   Canadian sledge team

   wins world opener

   The Canadian sledge hockey team opened the world championship with a 6-1 win
over Japan yesterday. Billy Bridges, of Kitchener, Ont., led the defending
champions with a hat trick.

   Trampoline

   Cockburn warms up

   with a gold medal

   World champion Karen Cockburn of Toronto, warming up for a crack at the
Olympic podium this summer, won the gold medal in women's trampoline yesterday
at a World Cup trampoline and tumbling competition. Cockburn finished first at
39.8 points. Tatiana Petrenia of Belarus was second.

   WITH FILES FROM STAR WIRE SERVICES

   SPORTS DIGEST

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 2004


                              212 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2004 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                   February 19, 2004 Thursday Ontario Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 453 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy promising for muscular dystrophy

BYLINE: Karen Palmer, Toronto Star

HIGHLIGHT:
Quebec scientists pioneer research Cells transplanted into young patients

BODY:

   Gene therapy

   In a world first, Quebec researchers have devised a gene therapy to treat a
severe form of muscular dystrophy, using a method of cell transplantation that
could also benefit heart attack survivors and hemophiliacs.

   "This research really is a very strong indicator of a direction that we will
pursue aggressively and can lead to treatment," said George Henderson,
spokesperson for Muscular Dystrophy Canada.

   "We don't want to overstate that or be too aggressive on that. It's a very
important first step along a long path. It will be some time before we see it
translated into bedside care or treatment for Duchenne muscular dystrophy," he
added.

   Duchenne is an early onset form of the disease, typically striking between
ages 2 and 6.

   Researchers found that cells transplanted into Duchenne patients could
actually trigger the growth of a protein crucial to muscle development that's
missing in people with muscular dystrophy.

   "I think it's a very good step forward," lead investigator Dr. Jacques
Tremblay of the Centre Hospitality du Universidad Quebec, a research centre
affiliated with Laval University, said in an interview.

   People with muscular dystrophy aren't able to produce a protein called
dystrophin, which protects muscle fibres from breaking as they contract.

   Myoblast cells can repair broken muscle fibres, but because the fibres are so
easily broken in muscular dystrophy patients, the cells eventually wear out and
the fibres stay broken.

   That leads to the general muscle breakdown and weakness that puts muscular
dystrophy patients in wheelchairs and leads to early death.

   Researchers in Tremblay's lab harvested myoblast cells from the fathers of
three Duchenne patients.

   The cells were then grafted them into the boys' shin muscles, in a technique
that was tested 10 years ago, but mostly abandoned when the results proved
inconclusive.

   The theory is that the transplanted cells would compensate for the missing
gene and begin producing the absent protein.

   This time around, Tremblay's team proved that a trio of patients, aged 8, 10
and 16, were producing dystrophin thanks to their fathers' donated cells.

   Each was first treated with immunosuppressants to keep their immune systems
from attacking the cells, then received 25 injections of the cells.

   The results are published in the latest issue of Molecular Therapy, the
journal of the American Society for Gene Therapy.

   The trial is small, but enormously promising, since the same kind of therapy
could be applied to hemophiliacs or people with incontinence, experts say.

   Even patients whose heart walls are thinning, and whose only hope for
survival is a heart transplant, could benefit.

LOAD-DATE: February 19, 2004


                              214 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2004 Sun Media Corporation
                      London Free Press (Ontario, Canada)

                    January 24, 2004 Saturday Final Edition

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. E1

LENGTH: 562 words

HEADLINE: MUSCLE-GROWTH DISCOVERY RAISES QUESTIONS FOR SPORTS

BYLINE: BY JIM KERNAGHAN, FREE PRESS SPORTS COLUMNIST

BODY:

   The field-goal kicker strides out and thumps a 70-yard field goal.

   The shot putter steps up and cannons the ball 25 metres.

   The hockey player unloads a 250-km/h slapshot.

   The next wave of sports cheating isn't far away via genetic engineering, it
would seem. A couple of University of Western Ontario professors yesterday
confirmed gene therapy experiments that promote exceptional muscle growth in
mice and rats can have human applications.

   Researchers at the University of Pennsylvania used the therapy to produce
increased levels of IGF-1, an insulin-like growth factor and a protein that
promotes muscle growth and repair.

   Research using mice and rats is intended to benefit the elderly and those
people with muscle-wasting diseases. But the result also has the keen interest
of sports.

   The rats experienced a 35- per-cent strength gain in the targeted muscles and
didn't lose any of it when the scientists ceased their workouts.

   "If you can do it with a diseased muscle, why can't you do it for a normal
muscle?" observed Western genetics expert Shiva Singh of the faculty of
medicine. "I wouldn't be surprised if somebody is trying it as we speak. There's
no way to stop it.

   "Should we do it is another question," added Singh, who also specializes in
ethical issues in genetics.

   Prof. Peter Lemon of Western's faculty of health sciences and kinesiology is
preparing for experiments seeking to introduce IGF-1 orally.

   "There are a lot of benefits, especially for older folks," he said. "We're
thinking of getting it into a drink. The big problem is, these things are
proteins or are attached to proteins and they may be altered during the
digestive process.

   "That's not a problem with what they're doing because they have apparently
altered a gene that is producing a compound and releasing it into the
bloodstream and getting all these positive effects relative to muscle growth."

   Lemon echoed Singh's view regarding ethics. "How close it is to being applied
to humans, I can't say," he said. "It may already have been done.

   "Obviously, it's ethically inappropriate."

   That won't stop some in sports from seeking that elusive IGF-1 edge in the
same way as they have with performance-enhancing substances, such as steroids
and human growth hormones.

   The Penn researchers learned that soon enough.

   There's an entire subculture of athletes, coaches and chemists seeking
whatever they can find to improve performances. The researchers have been
inundated with calls and e-mail messages from weight-lifters and body-builders.
One high school football coach wanted his team treated.

   Lee Sweeney, chair of Penn's physiology department, has said the experiments
designed to strengthen weakened muscles could easily be applied for the ignoble
purpose of better sports performance. He told the New York Times it would be
simple to strengthen a sprinter's legs.

   "I would put the whole leg on bypass," he said. "I would isolate the leg and
put in the virus through the blood. It would be more efficient than injections.
This is nothing a vascular surgeon couldn't do."

   Many elite athletes, currently playing cat-and-mouse with drug-detecting
teams, would be able to breathe more easily. It wouldn't be detectable through
blood, urine or saliva samples, only through muscle biopsies.

   The road to cleaner sports is clearly approaching another steep hill.

LOAD-DATE: January 24, 2004


                              215 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2003 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                  December 24, 2003 Wednesday Ontario Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A10

LENGTH: 390 words

HEADLINE: Mice-tested gene therapy promising

BYLINE: Karen Palmer, Toronto Star

HIGHLIGHT:
A step toward cystic fibrosis treatment Human trials at least five years away

BODY:

   Doctors at the Hospital for Sick Children are using hollowed out viruses to
cure bacterial infections in mice, the first step to building a promising gene
therapy for deadly forms of pneumonia in children with cystic fibrosis.

   "I think it's very exciting, potentially, and I underline potentially because
it's not been tried in humans," said Cathleen Morrison, chief executive officer
of the Canadian Cystic Fibrosis Foundation.

   "If it can produce the same kind of benefit in humans, it would be
remarkable," she said.

   Although gene therapy was initially hailed as a cure to all the world's
medical ailments, from Parkinson's to Alzheimer's to cancer, it comes with a
host of side effects, including dangerous toxicity, that have so far proven
insurmountable.

   "When you put anything into human cells, no matter in which way, you always
have a host immune response. That's quite difficult to deal with," said Dr. Jim
Hu, a senior scientist at the Hospital for Sick Children.

   His team took a virus, removed its viral genes and replaced them with a
combination of DNA control regions designed at McMaster University and a gene
designed to correct the flaw that causes cystic fibrosis.

   They then inserted the reconstructed virus in the nostrils of laboratory
mice, and then exposed the mice to a bacterium that can cause blood poisoning
and pneumonia in children.

   They found the treated mice were able to fight off the infection rather than
becoming ill.

   The next step is to test the therapy in larger animals over longer periods of
time. Hu figures his research team is at least five years away from even
thinking about human clinical trials.

   "Although this is a significant step forward in CF lung gene therapy
research, it will take time and effort to see whether we can bring clinical
benefit to patients," he said. "If this technology can benefit CF patients, it
may be modified for the treatment of other airway diseases as well."

   Cystic fibrosis is a hereditary disease that always ends in death. A
deficiency in a person's genetic makeup causes a thick build-up of mucus in the
body, affecting the pancreas, the intestines and the lungs, which become so
weighed down with fluid it causes major breathing problems.

   About one in every 2,500 children born in Canada is later diagnosed with
cystic fibrosis.

LOAD-DATE: December 24, 2003


                              219 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2003 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                    October 2, 2003 Thursday Ontario Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A23

LENGTH: 619 words

HEADLINE: McMaster discoveries raise hope for vaccine

BYLINE: Suzanne Morrison, Torstar News Service

HIGHLIGHT:
Tests on findings start next week, scientist says Human trials could begin in
six months

BODY:

   McMaster University researchers have taken a step closer to finding a SARS
vaccine with two leading-edge discoveries.

   And next week they'll begin to test their findings, which if successful,
could lead to the medical breakthrough.

   Yesterday, the researchers announced they had cloned the gene that marks an
important nuclear protein of the SARS virus.

   "This is very important because if you look at the serum (blood) from
patients infected with SARS, they all have a strong antibody response to this
protein," said Dr. Jim Mahony, of the nucleocapsid protein and his discovery.

   He believes that by purifying the protein, it could be used as a vaccine
against severe acute respiratory syndrome.

   "We know when you are infected with SARS that you make a large amount of
antibodies to this protein," he said. "We are hoping the antibodies that are
made will neutralize (kill) the virus."

   Mahony, head of the regional virology program at St. Joseph's hospital, and
the McMaster team have also discovered a second protein, called the spike
protein - which sticks out of the SARS virus like a spike.

   They believe it, too, could potentially be developed into a second SARS
vaccine.

   In experiments that get under way next week, researchers will inject mice
with both proteins and then measure the abilities of antibodies to kill SARS.

   "If the mice make antibodies to these two proteins, and the antibodies kill
the virus, these would be very good vaccine candidates that we could purify and
inject into humans," Mahony said.

   Trials in monkeys are expected to begin within the next three months and
human trials in six months.

   The ultimate goal, a SARS vaccine, is likely two years away.

   The advances made by the McMaster researchers are good news, said Dr.
Bhagirath Singh, scientific director of the Institute of Infection and Immunity
at the Canadian Institutes of Health Research.

   The institute is funding the team's work and Singh said he finds it "really
exciting that it is paying off."

   A vaccine tries to do the same thing our bodies do when we catch an
infection.

   When we are infected with a virus or bacteria, our bodies make antibodies,
which are proteins in our blood that neutralize, or kill, the infection. The
presence of these circulating antibodies are crucial for combating all diseases.

   The McMaster research team is headed by Dr. Jack Gauldie, chair of the
department of pathology and molecular medicine, who is also director of the
Centre for Gene Therapeutics. Along with Mahony, the team includes Frank Graham,
Mary Hitt, Ludvik Prevec and Uma Sankar.

   Gauldie said eight or nine labs across Canada are involved in various stages
of developing a vaccine.

   "We think we are ahead of other groups," he said.

   Mahony built his discovery on the findings of the British Columbia Centre for
Disease Control and its DNA sequence data identified in the spring.

   Infectious disease specialist Dr. Mark Loeb, director of the Canadian SARS
Research Network, said the discovery is an excellent step in the development of
a SARS vaccine.

   "SARS is a deadly disease, particularly dangerous to those with compromised
health," said Loeb, also an infectious disease specialist at McMaster.

   "The development of a vaccine is important in ensuring Canadians are better
protected against a reoccurrence of the syndrome."

   SARS made hundreds of people ill in Canada this spring, and was responsible
for the deaths of 44 people in the Toronto area.

   It emerged in southern China last November and was first mistaken for a
severe form of pneumonia. Between November and May, it infected an estimated
8,500 people in 30 countries, killing more than 800.

   HAMILTON SPECTATOR

LOAD-DATE: October 2, 2003


                              222 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2003 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                     August 22, 2003 Friday Ontario Edition

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. D02

LENGTH: 360 words

HEADLINE: Parkinson's gene therapy

BYLINE: REUTERS

HIGHLIGHT:
Risky surgery in N.Y. hospital First patient bounces back

BODY:

   Two days after becoming the first adult to receive gene therapy for
Parkinson's disease, Nathan Klein said he was glad to have taken "a big step
forward, or maybe backward" to help himself and others with the progressive
movement disorder.

   The 55-year-old television producer was up and about, and in wise-cracking
good spirits on Wednesday, at a news conference at New York-Presbyterian
Hospital, where surgeons performed the risky five-hour brain operation on
Monday.

   "It feels good to get all this attention. I've never been on this end of the
camera before," said Klein, who helped produce the syndicated television program
"Everyday with Joan Lunden" in the 1990s.

   Klein said he felt no better or any worse than before the operation, during
which Dr. Michael Kaplitt delivered gene therapy droplets to the target area of
his brain through an opening in his skull.

   The droplets contained countless copies of a normally occurring gene, called
GAD, that doctors hope will begin producing its designated protein. The protein
is meant to produce a molecule called GABA, which calms over- excited nerve
cells in the brain.

   The genes are unable by themselves to enter brain cells. So each copy was
stuffed into a seemingly harmless virus called the adeno-associated virus, which
can penetrate human cells and drop off its gene cargo.

   Parkinson's is a progressive disorder in which damage to nerve cells in a
deep part of the brain eventually causes muscle shaking or rigidity, poor
co-ordination and difficulty walking. The nerve damage disrupts production of
GABA and the brain messenger chemical dopamine, which sends nerve signals to
muscles.

   "GABA normally acts as a brake to control firing of neurons, but the firing
becomes extremely rapid" among people with Parkinson's, said Dr. Matthew During,
a medical professor at the University of Auckland who helped conduct earlier
animal trials of the gene therapy technique.

   The hope is that the transplanted genes will spur production of enough new
GABA molecules to replace those lost to the disease.

   Klein is the first of 12 patients the hospital aims to treat with the
technique.

GRAPHIC: STUART RAMSON / AP PHOTO Parkinson's patient Nathan Klein, with his
family, speaks to media after his gene therapy operation.

LOAD-DATE: August 22, 2003


                              231 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2003 Sun Media Corporation
                      London Free Press (Ontario, Canada)

                       July 7, 2003 Monday Final Edition

SECTION: LIFESTYLES; Pg. D4

LENGTH: 295 words

HEADLINE: THIRD GENE DISCOVERED RELATED TO HEART DEFECTS

BYLINE: BY ANDREW BRIDGES, AP

BODY:

   Scientists have identified a third gene that can cause congenital heart
defects, a leading cause of death in newborns.

   A malfunctioning version of the gene, called GATA4, can lead to defects in
the formation of the walls that separate the four chambers of the heart.

   Individuals from families with a history of the common heart defect already
are being screened for the mutated gene. Such screenings can prepare them for
the possibility their offspring are at risk.

   The discovery also could lead to drug or genetic therapies that could fix the
problem in fetuses, although such treatments are years away, said study
co-author Dr. Deepak Srivastava of the University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center in Dallas.

   Details of the discovery appeared yesterday on the Web site of the journal
Nature.

   About 25,000 babies born in the United States each year, or as many as one in
125 births, have a heart defect, according to the March of Dimes. Many defects
require open-heart surgery.

   U.S. and Japanese researchers discovered the mutated gene while plumbing the
genetic makeups of two multigenerational families plagued by heart defects.

   GATA4 mutations appeared in all family members with defects, but not in those
without them, nor did researchers find the defect in 3,000 unrelated individuals
they screened.

   The gene, which regulates a host of other genes, is the third known to play a
role in heart defects. Researchers believe others remain to be discovered.

   Eventually, the gene also could reveal a way of repairing the damage caused
by heart attacks in adults, since it appears to regulate heart tissue growth,
said Dr. Roberta Williams, a pediatric cardiologist at the University of
Southern California, who was not connected with the research.

LOAD-DATE: July 7, 2003


                              232 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2003 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                  Toronto Star

                     June 7, 2003 Saturday Ontario Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C05

LENGTH: 288 words

HEADLINE: Targeted Genetics shares soar 66%

BYLINE: BLOOMBERG NEWS

HIGHLIGHT:
Human tests set for AIDS vaccine Good results in animal studies

BODY:
Targeted Genetics Corp., an unprofitable developer of gene therapy drugs, said
yesterday it will start human tests of an AIDS vaccine this year after seeing
positive results in animal studies. The company's stock jumped 66 per cent.

   The company's tgAACO9 vaccine prompted an immune response in rabbits, it said
in a statement. Safety testing in humans will begin in the second half of 2003.

   There is no vaccine or cure for HIV, the virus that causes AIDS. Successful
trials might help Targeted Genetics raise capital, analysts said.

   "It's a big talking market," said Paul Abel, manager of the Kinetics Medical
Fund, which owns about 10,000 shares of Targeted Genetics. "This will probably
afford them the opportunity to further capitalize the company."

   The stock rose $1.59 (U.S.) to $4 on the Nasdaq Stock Market yesterday. The
shares more than doubled Thursday after the company reported its gene therapy
for cystic fibrosis helped improve patients' lung function in a study.

   Experts say a vaccine is the best way to stop the spread of AIDS, which
threatens to kill 68 million people by 2020. Researchers have been trying to
develop one since the 1980s, when scientists first identified HIV and its
genetic code.

   Because of HIV's ability to mutate, the virus is a difficult target. VaxGen
Inc.'s AIDS vaccine AIDSVAX failed this year to show it could protect against
HIV in a 5,009-patient test, the largest study of its kind. Other companies,
including Merck & Co. and Aventis SA, are also working on AIDS vaccines.

   Targeted Genetics reduced its workforce and cut some research programs this
year to conserve cash for developing its AIDS vaccine and cystic fibrosis and
arthritis therapies.


GRAPHIC: :

LOAD-DATE: June 7, 2003


                              234 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2003 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                  Toronto Star

                     May 31, 2003 Saturday Ontario Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C02

LENGTH: 727 words

HEADLINE: Briefs and Company news

BODY:
WorldCom finds buyer

   for ex-CEO's ranch

   WorldCom Inc. has found a buyer for a British Columbia ranch seized from its
previous chief executive, Bernard Ebbers, in its bid to recover some of the more
than $400 million (U.S.) he owed the company when ousted last year.

   The bankrupt telecommunications carrier expects to receive $68.5 million
(U.S.), roughly one-sixth of the total value of Ebbers' loan, through the sale
of the Douglas Lake Ranch to Stanley Kroenke, the co-owner of the St. Louis Rams
professional football franchise.

   Two weeks ago, WorldCom said Ebbers, who was born in Edmonton, didn't make
the first loan payment of $25 million due April 29, putting him in default.

   Canadian arm for sale

   Utility giant Aquila Inc. is putting its Canadian operations up for sale this
summer in an auction that could draw bids of more than $700 million from local
energy firms, including Calgary's Enmax Corp.

   The U.S.-based power company has been selling pieces of its global operations
over the past year in an effort to pay down the company's heavy debt.

   Aquila, which owns 90,000 kilometres of power lines in Alberta, had not
sought offers for its profitable Canadian arm, but reconsidered after receiving
strong interest from potential buyers.

   Rand sells subsidiary

   Rand A Technology Corp. of Mississauga, operating as RAND Worldwide, has
completed the sale of one of its German units to the established management
group as part of its restructuring.

   The terms of the agreement weren't disclosed.

   The company said the subsidiary, RAND Technologies GmbH, is based in
Ellwangen, Germany, and employs 183 people.

   In addition to this sale, RAND is implementing a number of changes to reduce
costs, including a reduction of about 170 employees and the closing of "a
number" of offices.

   Microsoft settles suit

   AOL Time Warner Inc., the world's largest media company, will use $750
million (U.S.) from a legal settlement with Microsoft Corp. to reduce debt,
chief executive Richard Parsons said.

   Microsoft said yesterday that it had agreed to settle an antitrust lawsuit by
New York-based AOL Time Warner. The lawsuit accused Microsoft of illegally
dominating the market for Internet-browser software and shutting out AOL Time
Warner's Netscape Navigator program.

   Parsons has said he will reduce AOL Time Warner's debt, $26.3 billion (U.S.)
in March, to $20 billion by the end of next year.

   Warnex loss widens

   Warnex Inc., a food safety technology company, reported yesterday a
first-quarter loss of $1.1 million as it spent more on marketing of its
Genevision bacteria detecting technology, which will launch later this year.

   Laval, Que.-based Warnex said its loss totalled 3 cents a share. That
compared with a year-earlier loss of $322,466 or 1 cent a share.

   Revenue for the quarter ended March 31 rose by 37 per cent to $1.7 million
from $1.2 million a year ago.

   Wheaton output up

   Wheaton River Minerals Ltd. of Vancouver, boosted by a higher gold price,
increased production and a significant acquisition, has reported first-quarter
net earnings of $4.1 million (U.S).

   The profit of 2 cents per share on sales of $17.9 million (U.S.) was up from
$262,000, nil per share, in the year-earlier quarter when the company had no
sales.

   Chromos loss narrows

   Chromos Molecular Systems Inc. reported yesterday that it narrowed its
first-quarter loss to $1.6 million as its research costs dipped. The Burnaby,
B.C., company, which is involved with gene therapy and related techniques, said
the loss amounted to 10 cents a share for the quarter ended March 31, compared
with a year-earlier loss of $2 million, or 12 cents a share.

   Storage facility sold

   Pembina Pipeline Income Fund is paying $185 million in cash to Nova Chemicals
Corp. for a half-interest in the Fort Saskatchewan Ethylene Storage Limited
Partnership.

   The partnership owns a large ethylene storage facility in five salt caverns
northeast of Edmonton, described as "a key component of the petrochemical
infrastructure industry" in Alberta.

   The acquisition is expected to close June 24, subject to a right of first
refusal held by Dow Chemical Canada Inc., the operator of the facility and owner
of the other 50 per cent interest.

   WITH FILES FROM STAR WIRE SERVICES


GRAPHIC: :

LOAD-DATE: May 31, 2003


                              243 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2003 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                  Toronto Star

                     March 21, 2003 Friday Ontario Edition

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. D04

LENGTH: 976 words

HEADLINE: Are humans hard-wired to behave aggressively?

BYLINE: MARGIE WYLIE, special to the star

HIGHLIGHT:
Y chromosome could be the culprit in war But we are in process of getting
domesticated

BODY:
When technology has made the world smaller than ever, why does mankind still
resort to settling international differences with the blunt instrument of war?

   The clues may be in our genes. An emerging and controversial branch of
science suggests that humans are, at least in part, hard-wired for aggression
and other troublesome behaviours.

   Many modern problems are caused "simply by doing well what we have evolved to
do: garner, consume, be fertile, give to our children, and not look too far
ahead," University of Michigan evolutionary ecologist Bobbi S. Low wrote in her
book Why Sex Matters: A Darwinian Look At Human Behavior.

   Harvard anthropologist Richard Wrangham fingers the Y chromosome as the
culprit in war.

   In his book Demonic Males: Apes And The Origins Of Human Violence, Wrangham
argues that more aggressive men were the most successful breeders back in our
dim evolutionary past.

   While females have evolved around the priority of protecting their young, and
thus are more risk-averse, "sexual selection has favoured male temperaments that
are attracted to high-risk, high-gain ventures," Wrangham said. "That leads to
... wildness that hikes insurance rates for young men and a greater willingness
to risk their lives and the lives of others."

   Wrangham bases his work in part on observations of chimpanzees, one of
humanity's closest evolutionary cousins. Male chimps fight one another directly
for access to females, he says. But they also make group raids into neighbouring
clans, killing out-of-group males without provocation or apparent immediate
gain. In other words, they wage war.

   Of course, the reproductive advantage that conferred on human males thousands
of years ago has disappeared in modern society. Why, then, does the behaviour
persist?

   Low explains that the behaviours evolution favoured tended to offer
"secondary rewards" - that is, they felt good, and still do. This unties the
impulse from its survival purpose: young men don't drive recklessly because it
ensures more offspring; they do it because it feels good.

   Geneticists have just begun to link DNA sequences to certain behaviours. So
far, it's been slow going.

   "Behaviours are at least 50 per cent or so non-genetic, and of the genetic
contribution, it's probably spread between many, many different genes," Dean H.
Hamer, a behavioural geneticist told the recent Future of Life Conference.

   Critics, meanwhile, say these scientists vastly overestimate the pull of
genes on behaviour.

   "The whole idea that aggression is somehow ingrained in our genes is pure
hogwash," said Stanford biologist Paul R. Ehrlich, who wrote Human Natures:
Genes, Cultures and the Human Prospect as a counterpoint to the growing chorus
of voices supporting genetic theories.

   "There's absolutely no data to indicate that more aggressive people have more
offspring than others," he said. In primates, in fact, "sneaky males" who skirt
confrontations to mate surreptitiously "do just as good or better than the
aggressive ones."

   Ehrlich favours an environmental explanation of behaviour.

   Others worry that genetic theories offer a convenient excuse to give in to
badness. Why try to find answers to war or even crime if our genes make us do
it?

   The scientists respond that humans are more than automatons.

   Harvard economist Terry Burnham, co-author of Mean Genes: From Sex To Money
To Food, Taming Our Primal Instincts, argues that the influence of those genes
is strong enough that we can't hope to overcome it by willpower alone. The
answer is to create structures that channel our tendencies in ways that benefit
us.

   "Humans are built to kill each other in certain settings," Burnham said. "If
you want to prevent killing, as I do, then you need to engineer a world that
doesn't lead people to murder and war."

   Wrangham agreed.

   In Bonbono monkeys, he said, females keep male aggression in check by
travelling in packs and defending one another. While he doesn't suggest women do
the same, he thinks they could use the ballot box to shift foreign policy.

   But waiting for evolution to breed out our bad traits can take a long time.

   Bonbono monkeys, famous for their loving societies, split off from
chimpanzees some 2.5 million years ago, Wrangham said; biologists guess they
evolved their peaceful leanings only about 10,000 years ago.

   So, if evolution is dealing its hand too slowly, why not speed things up by
engineering out warlike tendencies?

   Not likely, said Hamer. For one thing, "gene therapy has not yet worked in
the simplest case of replacing a gene in an adult individual," he remarked at
the conference. Even if we had the technology, genes that affect behaviour tend
to affect multiple behaviours at once. For example, he said, "the same gene that
causes some people to be anxious and depressed and moody is also a gene that, if
you take it away, makes people much less interested in sex."

   But there is some hope. Wrangham argues in an upcoming book that humans have
made evolutionary strides toward being less aggressive, at least inside groups.

   Domesticated animals, bred for docility, have as much as a quarter less brain
mass than their wild cousins, he said. And the peaceful Bonbonos have brains
about 10 per cent smaller than their fierce chimpanzee cousins.

   Not coincidentally, Wrangham said, modern humans have lost about 10 per cent
of their brain mass in the last 30,000 years. While most biologists explain the
difference by body size - ancient humans had larger bodies and thus larger
brains - Wrangham thinks we're simply in the process of domesticating ourselves.

   "We couldn't possibly live in big cities if we were chimps. We'd attack each
other all the time," he said. "We are species that are learning to control our
violent behaviour, at least inside groups."

   Newhouse News Service


GRAPHIC: REUTERS POOL PHOTO A member of the 1st Battalion Light Infantry battle
group practices close-quarter fighting in the Kuwaiti desert near the Iraq
border.

LOAD-DATE: March 21, 2003


                              245 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2003 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                  Toronto Star

                   January 30, 2003 Thursday Ontario Edition

SECTION: Pg. P09

LENGTH: 365 words

HEADLINE: Miranda's special vision Books

BYLINE: Amy Hunter, Planet Reviewer

BODY:
Cloning Miranda is a book that's not taken off the shelves very often perhaps
because it's a little scary: the colours are different than you normally see.
It's unusual, maybe even a little scary, but the book itself is wonderful.

   Miranda is a perfect teenager. She's always home by her curfew, she never
lies to anyone including her parents, and she gets straight A's.

   Her best friend Emma is the reverse of Miranda. She does the exact opposite
of what her parents tell her, just to make them mad or worried.

   Both Emma and Miranda have special talents. Emma has a huge voice, and
Miranda can dance ballet really well.

   At Miranda's dress rehearsal for the big dance recital in a few days, she's
waiting for her entrance and her vision gets blurry. Her parents take her
immediately to a doctor who says that Miranda has a tumor in her eye, on her
lungs, on her liver, and a little on her kidneys. She has an incurable disease
called Von-Hippel Lindeau.

   At school she looks it up, finds out that it's genetic, but 5 per cent of
people develop it spontaneously.

   She is taken to a special clinic that her father owns, and they do more
tests.

   After her dance recital, her vision goes blurry again. She goes to the
special clinic and has to stay there for three nights. Then she will have an
operation on her liver, because that's where the tumors are worst. The rest will
be shrunk by a new therapy called gene therapy.

   Miranda has a really creepy dream. Her vision is better, so she buzzes for
the nurse, Jean. Jean is nowhere in sight, so Miranda goes looking for her. Then
she hears crying coming from an opening in the wall. She looks inside, and sees
...

   Sorry, but I have to stop there, in order to keep the ending secret.

   This book by Carol Matas isn't very long, but keeps you on the edge of your
seat, and is full of great emotion. One minute Miranda is polite and
trustworthy, the next she's filled with murderous rage. Although this book is
not the feel-good book of the year, it grabs you and pulls you into the story,
so it becomes an adventure for both you and Miranda.

   Cloning Miranda, by Carol Matas (Scholastic)..

   Amy Hunter, 12, is in Grade 7.


LOAD-DATE: January 30, 2003


                              248 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2003 Sun Media Corporation
                      London Free Press (Ontario, Canada)

                    January 16, 2003 Thursday, Final Edition

SECTION: Lifestyles; Pg. C8

LENGTH: 289 words

HEADLINE: WORM RESEARCHERS STUDY FAT GENES

BYLINE: ALEX DOMINGUEZ, AP

BODY:

   Gene manipulation that created sleek and trim roundworms may ultimately help
scientists develop new obesity treatments.

   Harvard biologist Gary Ruvkun used a new technique to identify about 400
genes in the roundworm's genetic code related to fat production and storage.

   His team deactivated, or "turned off," about 300 of the genes in experiments
and "the worms are thin and happy," Ruvkun said. When they knocked out the
activity of the other 100 genes, worms grew fatter.

   Details of the roundworm experiments and the new genetic technique appear in
today's issue of the journal Nature.

   "If someone told me we'd be using this kind of protocol even three years ago,
I'd have said, 'That's crazy -- don't even think about it,' " Ruvkun said.

   Scientists frequently conduct basic experiments with roundworms -- known by
their scientific name as C. elegans -- because they are inexpensive and simple.
Scientists can fit 100,000 on a lab dish, and they reproduce within four days.

   Yet humans share about half the roundworm's 19,000 genes, including 200 of
the fat-storage genes. Whether the same gene knockout technique will work in
humans is unclear, but obesity drugs might be developed based on the basic
understanding of the genes, Ruvkun said.

   Other biologists cautioned that drug companies would need at least a decade
to safely develop a genetic therapy for obesity. One in five Americans is obese
and obesity is implicated in cardiovascular disease, diabetes and other
illnesses.

   "The worm studies will allow the identification of many more genes much more
rapidly. It'll also speed up the process of figuring out how they work," said
Leon Avery of the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center in Dallas.

LOAD-DATE: January 16, 2003


                              249 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2003 Sun Media Corporation
                      London Free Press (Ontario, Canada)

                    January 16, 2003 Thursday, Final Edition

SECTION: Lifestyles; Pg. C10

LENGTH: 107 words

HEADLINE: GENE TRIALS HALTED

BYLINE: GANNETT NEWS SERVICE

BODY:

   The U.S. Food and Drug Administration temporarily has suspended dozens of
gene-therapy trials now that a second European child has come down with a
leukemia-like illness brought on by a gene-therapy treatment.

   Gene therapy tries to cure disease by replacing damaged genes in the body
with healthy ones.

   Gene therapy's one success has been in treating some children suffering from
"bubble boy" disease, formally known as severe combined immunodeficiency, or
SCID.

   But in France, a leukemia-like illness struck one boy four months ago and now
a second child, representing another setback for the experimental gene-therapy
field.

LOAD-DATE: January 16, 2003


                              256 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2002 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                  Toronto Star

                   November 23, 2002 Saturday Ontario Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A08

LENGTH: 395 words

HEADLINE: Medical research or experiment?

BYLINE: Prithi Yelaja, Toronto Star

HIGHLIGHT:
Father speaks out on gene therapy death Researcher stood to benefit from study

BODY:
Medical research took his son's life, but Paul Gelsinger hopes the lessons
learned from the tragic death will benefit others.

   Jesse Gelsinger, 18, died in 1999 just four days after being injected with
genes to treat a liver disorder, becoming the first patient whose death was
directly linked to experimental gene therapy.

   "I helped my son walk right into this. That is what is most painful,"
Gelsinger told a meeting on biomedical law and ethics at the University of
Toronto yesterday.

   He and his son were not informed of the true risks of the treatment given for
ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency syndrome at the University of
Pennsylvania, said Gelsinger, of Tucson, Ariz. They were not told a monkey had
died in a similar study and that another patient had suffered serious side
effects.

   "There was not really informed consent and in a way there was coercion. It
was presented as being safe and effective. We were told it would help newborn
babies. How do you say no to something like that?" asked Gelsinger.

   He blames a medical research system that is "rife with conflicts of
interests" for the tragedy.

   The study Jesse took part in was later widely criticized because one of its
principal investigators, Dr. Jim Wilson, stood to profit from the experiment
through a biotechnology company he had founded.

   A subsequent investigation by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration found
numerous breaches of federal research rules in the case.

   Scientists with financial and other conflicts of interest should be prevented
from launching those studies, said Alan Milstein, a Philadelphia lawyer who
reached an out-of-court settlement in a civil suit on behalf of the Gelsinger
family.

   Milstein suggested reducing the number of clinical trials being undertaken
because it is virtually impossible for regulatory bodies like the FDA to closely
monitor all of them.

   There are more than 100,000 clinical trials involving about eight million
research subjects under way in the United States, Milstein said.

   "A lot of trivial research is going on just so the researcher can get tenure
or get a grant," he said, pointing to the Nuremberg Code, which says research
should be done only if it's valuable.

   To bring home the risks involved, researchers should use the word experiment
instead of clinical trial, "because that's what it is," he added.


GRAPHIC: Rick Eglinton/toronto star Paul Gelsinger of Tuscon, Ariz., was in
Toronto to take part in a discussion on biomedical law and ethics at U of T. His
son Jesse, 18, died after experimental gene therapy. Gelsinger says medical
research is [ldquo]rife with conflicts of interest.[rdquo]

LOAD-DATE: November 23, 2002


                              259 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2002 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                  Toronto Star

                   November 21, 2002 Thursday Ontario Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A03

LENGTH: 246 words

HEADLINE: Treatment with genes eases heart pain: Study

BYLINE: Daniel Q. Haney, Associated Press

BODY:
The largest study yet of gene therapy for heart disease shows the approach can
significantly relieve severe chest pain, though the improvements may take months
to become apparent.

   Researchers have been working for several years on the idea of injecting
genes directly into the heart to improve blood flow. Several smaller studies
have suggested a benefit, but the latest experiment is the first to subject the
approach to a careful comparison with standard treatment.

   "This is the first trial to provide a clear indication of efficacy of gene
therapy," said Dr. Duncan Stewart, cardiology chief at St. Michael's Hospital in
Toronto.

   Several teams around the world are competing to prove the benefits of various
combinations of genes for people with severe chest pain that cannot be treated
with drugs, angioplasty or bypass surgery. All involve delivering genes to the
heart to promote the growth of new blood vessels to carry nutrition and oxygen
to starved heart muscle.

   Stewart's study was financed by GenVac Inc. of Gaithersburg, Md. He presented
the results yesterday at the annual scientific meeting of the American Heart
Association.

   Unlike earlier studies reported so far, Stewart's experiment randomly
assigned 71 volunteers to have either gene therapy or to receive the usual
medical treatment. After three months, there was no difference.

   However, by six months, people who got the gene therapy could walk
significantly farther on a treadmill.


LOAD-DATE: November 21, 2002


                              263 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2002 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                  Toronto Star

                    October 25, 2002 Friday Ontario Edition

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. F03

LENGTH: 848 words

HEADLINE: Survey finds 'bleak' outlook on research rules

BYLINE: Peter Gorner, special to the star

BODY:
Academic institutions that use money from private sponsors to fund medical
research say they are finding it difficult to comply with tough new ethical
standards proposed by the major medical journals, researchers reported this
week.

   Officials at the institutions generally feel their hands are tied when they
enter into business arrangements with industry sponsors of clinical trials,
according to a survey of 108 medical schools published in the New England
Journal Of Medicine.

   The national survey presents "a bleak picture," the Journal wrote in an
accompanying editorial, with the goals of academic freedom and scientific truth
often placed in direct conflict with the business interests of sponsors.

   Pharmaceutical firms are the largest source of funding for medical research
in the U.S. and Canada, but companies can't survive if they don't make money for
shareholders and they may not want negative results about their drugs to be made
public.

   Academics, on the other hand, have a duty to evaluate drugs fairly and to
inform people of any dangers.

   Concerned about the integrity of clinical trials in a research environment
increasingly controlled by private interests - dubbed "the university-industrial
complex" - the International Committee of Medical Journal Editors last year
revised its guidelines for researchers submitting papers for publication.

   The new guidelines call for full disclosure of the sponsor's role in the
research, as well as assurances that investigators are truly independent. The
investigators should be fully accountable for the design and conduct of the
trial, have independent access to the data and control all editorial and
publication decisions, the committee said.

   But when researchers from Duke University medical and law schools conducted
the survey reported this week, they found medical schools are not rushing to
embrace those standards.

   "We found that academic institutions rarely ensure that their investigators
have full participation in the design of the trials, unimpeded access to trial
data and right to publish their findings," said lead author Dr. Kevin A.
Schulman, of Duke's Center for Clinical and Genetic Economics.

   "We think the system should be overhauled. The level of non-compliance with
the new standards surprised us. And we were amazed by how powerless the
institutions felt to change the way they participate in their sponsor-connected
trials."

   The institutions surveyed also rarely required the presence of an independent
executive committee, data and safety monitoring board or publications committee
as a condition of the participation in clinical trials conducted at multiple
medical centres.

   "We found that site agreements rarely addressed important elements of the
right to publish, including editorial control and criteria for authorship of
reports on multicentre trials," Schulman said.

   Researchers usually were allowed to publish the findings from a trial at
their own institution, but had no right to talk about the entire trial.

   Dr. Jeffrey M. Drazen, editor-in-chief of the New England Journal Of Medicine
and a noted asthma clinical researcher at Harvard University, finds that kind of
limitation ridiculous.

   "It means I can tell you how to make a brick, but not how to construct a
building," he said. "Often the true worth of a drug or treatment only shows up
after extensive trials at many institutions. If researchers are going to make
progress based on science, we need to revise the contract language that will
guide the relationship between institutions and commercial sponsors.

   "Right now, the sponsors hold all the cards."

   Ethicists have warned that greed and conflicts of interest could cost
biomedical research its public trust. They note, for example, that the contracts
researchers sign with pharmaceutical companies routinely prevent the scientists
from disclosing drug risks to patients and the public.

   The integrity of industry-sponsored clinical research has come into question
in the wake of several scandals, including the widely publicized 1999 death of
18-year-old Jesse Gelsinger in a gene therapy experiment at the University of
Pennsylvania.

   This week the New England Journal revisits the case of Nancy Olivieri, a
University of Toronto hematologist at The Hospital for Sick Children who was
conducting clinical trials of a drug for thalassemia patients in 1996.

   She discovered the drug was ineffective in some patients and might even cause
liver damage.

   So Apotex, the company which manufactured the drug and sponsored Olivieri's
work, terminated the trials and issued a legal warning to prevent the physician
from disclosing the risks to patients or publishing her findings.

   Lawsuits and countersuits followed.

   "Unless there are very strict ethical standards, private interests will try
to control data that's negative to them," said Sheldon Krimsky, a Tufts
University researcher who specializes in the ethics of science.

   "And the universities have to have standards that protect the right of
researchers to get at the truth."


LOAD-DATE: October 25, 2002


                              268 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2002 Sun Media Corporation
                      London Free Press (Ontario, Canada)

                     October 11, 2002 Friday, Final Edition

SECTION: Lifestyles; Pg. D10

LENGTH: 195 words

HEADLINE: PARKINSON'S GENE THERAPY TRIALS OKD

BYLINE: AP

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   In the first use of gene therapy to treat Parkinson's disease, researchers
plan to inject genes that make a vital neurochemical into the brains of 12
patients in an attempt to the calm the tremours and other movement symptoms of
the devastating brain disorder.

   Dr. Matthew During and Dr. Michael Kaplitt said the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration has approved the experimental therapy, based in part on the
results of a laboratory study to be published today.

   Kaplitt, a Parkinson's researcher at the Weill Medical College of Cornell
University in New York, said the trial will start late this year and involve
patients who have exhausted all the standard means of therapy.

   During, a researcher at the University of Auckland in New Zealand, and
Kaplitt demonstrated in laboratory rats that transferring the brain chemical
gene could greatly improve Parkinson's symptoms and may slow the progression of
the disease. The researchers said the technique has also been tried in monkeys
with encouraging results.

   Other brain researchers said the gene transfer technique is a promising
therapy, but extensive clinical trials will be needed before it proves itself

LOAD-DATE: October 11, 2002


                              269 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2002 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                  Toronto Star

                    October 11, 2002 Friday Ontario Edition

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. F03

LENGTH: 625 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy for Parkinson's

BYLINE: From Associated Press

BODY:
In the first use of gene therapy to treat Parkinson's disease, researchers plan
to inject genes that make a vital neurochemical into the brains of 12 patients
in an attempt to the calm the tremors and other movement disorders of the
devastating brain disorder.

   Dr. Matthew During and Dr. Michael Kaplitt said the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration has approved the experimental therapy for a dozen patients. The
approval was based, in part, on the results of a laboratory study.

   Kaplitt, a Parkinson's researcher at the Weill Medical College of Cornell
University in New York, said the gene therapy trial will start late this year
and involve patients who have exhausted all the standard means of therapy.

   During, a researcher at the University of Auckland, and Kaplitt are the
senior authors of the study in which the researchers demonstrated in laboratory
rats that transferring the brain chemical gene could greatly improve Parkinson's
symptoms and may slow the progression of the disease. The researchers said the
technique has also been tried in monkeys, with encouraging results.

   Other researchers said the gene transfer technique is a promising therapy,
but extensive clinical trials will be needed before it proves itself ready for
treatment of Parkinson's patients in general.

   "You've got to be cautious with gene therapy," said Dr. Christopher Ross, a
professor of psychiatry and neuroscience at the Johns Hopkins University School
of Medicine in Baltimore. "If they see the same results in humans, it will be an
important new approach to therapy."

   The researchers placed into a benign virus called adeno-associated virus a
gene that makes a brain chemical called GABA. This chemical works in a part of
the brain called the subthalamic nucleus, or STN, to calm or inhibit the motor
movements of the body.

   The STN in Parkinson's patients has very little GABA. This causes the
characteristic disease symptoms of tremors, a halting walk and the tendency to
suddenly "freeze" while in motion.

   Using rats who have chemically induced Parkinson's, the researchers injected
the manipulated virus into the affected part of the brain. The injected virus,
carrying the GABA gene, moves inside cells in the STN and causes the cells to
produce GABA.

   During and Kaplitt said the effect was shown quickly in the rats. Movement
control was better in all the animals, "but for 50 per cent of them there was a
remarkable improvement," During said.

   Kaplitt said the same experiment has been performed on Rhesus monkeys, but
the results are not yet published and neither researcher would discuss the
findings in detail.

   "There is nothing in the primate study that would discourage us," said
Kaplitt.

   Parkinson's disease is a brain degeneration disorder diagnosed in thousands
of patients annually. Besides the movement symptoms, some Parkinson's patients
develop depression, loss of memory and the ability to think clearly.

   The hallmark of Parkinson's is the destruction of neurons that make a brain
chemical called dopamine, which acts as signal messenger within the brain's
network of neurons. One of the actions of dopamine is to signal production of
GABA from one part of the brain. GABA then moves to the STN where it helps
control movement.

   Some drugs are used to restore production of dopamine in the brain and slow
progression of the disease, but the effects wear out over time.

   For this reason, Kaplitt said he and During decided to restore GABA levels in
the STN by injecting the gene into the neurons there. Those neurons normally do
not make GABA, he said.

   There are suggestions in the study that while relieving the Parkinson's
symptoms, the GABA gene therapy also slows the destructive pace of the disease.


LOAD-DATE: October 11, 2002


                              270 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2002 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                  Toronto Star

                     October 4, 2002 Friday Ontario Edition

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. F02

LENGTH: 468 words

HEADLINE: Gene trial halted as boy falls ill

BYLINE: Reuters News agency

BODY:
French doctors have suspended groundbreaking gene therapy trials after a young
boy undergoing the treatment developed a disease similar to leukemia, France's
public health agency said yesterday.

   "A complication was detected with one of the patients at the clinic
consisting of an uncontrolled lympho-proliferation which had to be treated," it
said in a statement. A spokeswoman said the disease was similar to leukemia.

   The trials had been suspended as a precaution until investigations into the
causes have been completed, the statement said.

   The news was a fresh blow in the pioneering domain of gene therapy, which
aims to cure disease by replacing faulty genes.

   Gene therapy research had been recovering from the shock death of an
18-year-old man in the United States in 1999 who had volunteered for the
treatment to try have a rare, inherited liver defect corrected. But the
announcement from Paris was sure to be a setback to other trials being conducted
across the world.

   "International collaboration is under way to try as soon as possible to weigh
the impact this incident may have on this type of gene therapy," the public
health agency said.

   Authorities in Germany halted trials there this year after scientists found
mice used in experiments had developed leukemia-like symptoms.

   A total of eight children had been undergoing gene therapy treatment at the
Necker-Enfants Malades hospital in Paris.

   "As soon as the complication was discovered, the families of the other
children undergoing such treatment and the scientific community were informed,"
the health body said. "The other children are in good health."

   Asked whether the illness could be linked to the gene therapy treatment, a
spokeswoman at the agency said: "At the moment, we do not know. We are in the
process of investigating it."

   The eight children have human severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) X1,
which leaves them without any working immune system. Patients usually live out
their short lives in sterile "bubbles" because any infection would kill them.

   In early 2000, professor Alain Fischer of the Necker hospital and colleagues
said they virtually cured two boys with SCID by restoring their immune systems
using gene therapy. British researchers also said they were treating patients.

   The boy who developed complications began gene therapy in 1999. Lymphocyte
irregularity was detected in the boy's blood early this year and doctors deemed
it to be serious in August, the public health agency said.

   Although scientists have been trying gene therapy for more than a decade, the
French trials appeared to be the first to score a real success.

   Early trials did not cure anyone, but sometimes helped to deal with certain
rare genetic conditions and had not been found to harm patients.


LOAD-DATE: October 4, 2002


                              275 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2002 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                  Toronto Star

                   September 5, 2002 Thursday Ontario Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A02

LENGTH: 618 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy aims for the heart

BYLINE: Prithi Yelaja, Toronto Star

HIGHLIGHT:
New study designed to ease pain in 'no-option patients'

BODY:
Prithi Yelaja

   Doctors at St. Michael's Hospital are leading a landmark study to test
whether gene therapy can ease the suffering of heart patients who have no other
options for treatment.

   About 15 per cent of heart patients fall into this category, said Dr. Duncan
Stewart, head of cardiology at St. Mike's and the study's lead investigator.

   "These are so-called 'no-option patients.' They have typically failed all
medical management and they continue to have debilitating angina which limits
their ability to participate in the activities of daily life."

   Terrence Deane, a Windsor resident, was the first patient to enrol in the
study.

   Deane, 58, suffered a heart attack in 1993 and has been struggling with
severely clogged arteries ever since. For medical reasons he is not a candidate
for bypass surgery or angioplasty - the balloon procedure to open up blocked
arteries.

   Angina - chest pain - forced Deane into early retirement and makes the
simplest of everyday activities difficult.

   "If I do any kind of work, even picking up my grandchild or washing my hair
in the shower, the pain gets quite a bit worse. The quality of life is really
poor," said Deane.

   A total of 110 such patients will be enrolled in the study at cardiac centres
in Toronto, Montreal, Edmonton, Victoria and Quebec City.

   The procedure consists of a small incision made in the patient's groin. With
the help of digital X-rays, a catheter with a small needle tip is then threaded
up to the heart through the femoral artery.

   Blood-starved portions of the heart are injected with either the gene
treatment - known as vascular endothelial growth factor - or a placebo.

   The procedure takes about three hours and is done under local anaesthetic,
with patients returning home the next day.

   "What we're actually doing is (increasing) the body's natural response to
make new blood vessels," said Dr. Michael Kutryk, a cardiologist at St. Mike's
and the study's co-investigator.

   The process of developing new blood vessels occurs naturally in some people,
but not so well in others, notably those who are older, smoke and have high
cholesterol.

   Kutryk pointed out that these are also the risk factors for heart disease.

   "If you're at risk of having heart disease you probably don't make blood
vessels as well as someone who doesn't have heart disease, so it's a Catch-22
situation."

   Tests on about 300 rats and pigs have confirmed the safety of the procedure,
but it is not without risks, Kutryk said.

   "Because the catheter is going directly inside the heart muscle, there is a
risk of making a hole in the heart itself if you're too aggressive. It's a very
small risk, just marginally higher than a standard angiogram, and these patients
have angiograms frequently to check the progression of their disease."

   There is also a theoretical risk that administering growth factor to the
heart may trigger the growth of blood vessels to an undetected cancerous tumour
and fuel the disease's progression.

   Because of this, patients will be screened for cancer before being accepted
into the study and those with a history of cancer will be excluded.

   The trial is randomized and double-blind, meaning neither the researchers nor
the patients will know until the trial is over who received the gene therapy and
who got the placebo.

   If the treatment proves effective, patients who received the placebo would be
first in line to get it, said Stewart. Results are expected in two years.

   Deane, who had the procedure last week, said he will be disappointed if he
only got a placebo, but added he had nothing to lose.

   "My options were down to zero. Knowing that, I'm happy to take a chance on
this."


LOAD-DATE: September 5, 2002


                              276 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2002 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                  Toronto Star

                   September 5, 2002 Thursday Ontario Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A02

LENGTH: 455 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy aims for heart

BYLINE: Prithi Yelaja, Toronto Star

HIGHLIGHT:
New study designed to ease pain in 'no-option patients'

BODY:
Prithi Yelaja

   Doctors at St. Michael's Hospital are leading a landmark study to test
whether gene therapy can ease the suffering of heart patients with no other
options for treatment.

   About 15 per cent of heart patients fall into this category, said Dr. Duncan
Stewart, head of cardiology at St. Mike's and the study's lead investigator.
"They have typically failed all medical management and they continue to have
debilitating angina which limits their ability to participate in the activities
of daily life."

   Terrence Deane, a Windsor resident, was the first patient to enrol in the
study. Deane, 58, suffered a heart attack in 1993 and has been struggling with
severely clogged arteries ever since. For medical reasons he is not a candidate
for bypass surgery or angioplasty, the balloon procedure to open arteries.

   A total of 110 such patients will be enrolled in the study at cardiac centres
in Toronto, Montreal, Edmonton, Victoria and Quebec City.

   The procedure consists of a small incision made in the patient's groin. With
the help of digital X-rays, a catheter with a small needle tip is then threaded
up to the heart through the femoral artery.

   Blood-starved portions of the heart are injected with either the gene
treatment - known as vascular endothelial growth factor - or a placebo. The
procedure takes about three hours and is done under local anaesthetic, with
patients returning home the next day.

   "What we're actually doing is (increasing) the body's natural response to
make new blood vessels," said Dr. Michael Kutryk, a cardiologist at St. Mike's
and the study's co-investigator.

   The process of developing new blood vessels occurs naturally in some people,
but not so well in others, notably those who are older, smoke and have high
cholesterol.

   Kutryk noted these are also the risk factors for heart disease. "If you're at
risk of having heart disease you probably don't make blood vessels as well as
someone who doesn't have heart disease, so it's a Catch-22 situation."

   Tests on about 300 rats and pigs have confirmed the safety of the procedure,
but it is not without risks, Kutryk said. "Because the catheter is going
directly inside the heart muscle, there is a risk of making a hole in the heart
itself if you're too aggressive. It's a very small risk, just marginally higher
than a standard angiogram."

   There is also a theoretical risk that administering growth factor to the
heart may trigger the growth of blood vessels to an undetected cancerous tumour
and fuel the disease's progression. Because of this, patients will be screened
for cancer before being accepted into the study and those with a history of
cancer will be excluded.

   Results are due in two years.


GRAPHIC: DUNCAN STEWART

LOAD-DATE: September 5, 2002


                              278 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2002 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                  Toronto Star

                    August 1, 2002 Thursday Ontario Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. D03

LENGTH: 665 words

HEADLINE: Lawyer donates $10M to St. Mike's, U of T

BYLINE: Prithi Yelaja, Toronto Star

BODY:
Prithi Yelaja

   Of all the lessons Toronto lawyer Terrence Donnelly learned from his long
friendship and business ties with Colonel Harland Sanders of Kentucky Fried
Chicken fame, the most lasting was the importance of sharing your success with
others.

   With that in mind, Donnelly is donating a total of $10 million to St.
Michael's Hospital and the University of Toronto to help improve medical
facilities for patients and further leading-edge research.

   "I was blessed in two areas of my life - business and health. I've never been
subjected to illness and I hope these gifts will make a difference in the lives
of people who do have medical problems," said Donnelly, 68, a life-long bachelor
who grew up in London, Ont., the son of a carpeting salesman.

   Donnelly's gift of $5 million to St. Mike's, one of the largest single
donations in the hospital's history, will help refurbish the hospital's aging
Queen St. wing. The overhaul will include building operating rooms for day
surgery patients, renovating waiting rooms and lounges and creating a peaceful
urban garden, complete with fountain, for patients and visitors.

   "A hospital stay is stressful and the idea is to make the environment
pleasant and minimize the stress as much as possible for patients and their
families," said Donnelly.

   Donnelly's $5 million donation to U of T will help build its Centre for
Cellular and Biomolecular Research (CCBR), a 12-storey glass structure planned
at the corner of College St. and University Ave.

   The innovative biomedical research facility is designed to build on the Human
Genome Project. The basic research that will be done at the centre is expected
to translate into clinical applications that will change the way heart disease,
cancer and other ailments are treated.

   "We will, in the fullness of time, have a parts inventory for the human body.
It's absolutely revolutionary. That facility will influence generations of
children yet unborn," said Donnelly.

   His donation is the first major private-sector support for the $100 million
building, which has attracted more than $60 million in funding from the federal
and Ontario governments.

   Dr. David Naylor, U of T's dean of medicine, called Donnelly's gift
extraordinary. "Our understanding of human biology has grown by leaps and
bounds, but we can only pull the pieces together with integrative centres like
the CCBR."

   Donnelly was a struggling lawyer when a chance encounter in 1964 with
Sanders, who hired him to close a modest real estate deal in Mississauga,
changed his life forever and set him on the path to fortune.

   Soon, Donnelly began to slip away from his everyday law practice to jump
aboard the Kentucky Fried Chicken express. Starting in the Niagara Peninsula, he
gradually acquired a string of franchises in others parts of Ontario, Quebec and
Alberta.

   By the time Sanders died at age 90 in 1980, Donnelly was on the board of
directors of what is now known as KFC (in 1991, Kentucky Fried Chicken changed
its name) and the charitable foundation that controls it. When PepsiCo Inc.
bought out KFC's Canadian operations in 1986, Donnelly became a very wealthy
man.

   "The Colonel would say he had a good time making all that money, but then
he'd say he had a lot more fun giving it away," said Donnelly, who took the
lesson to heart.

   In 1996, he donated $2 million to St. Mike's for new and expanded cardiac
research labs, though he had never had heart trouble nor ever been a patient at
the hospital.

   In 1998, he donated another $2 million to St. Mike's to establish the
8,000-square-foot Terrence Donnelly Heart Centre that performs cutting-edge
cardiac gene therapy.

   Donnelly does more than just hand over big cheques. "He's a very hands-on
donor," said Dr. Lee Errett, chief of cardiac surgery at St. Mike's.

   "He comes into the hospital most every night to feed the fish in the
aquarium, make sure the lounges are tidy, and talk to the patients."


GRAPHIC: TERRENCE DONNELLY: Hospital benefactor made a fortune with KFC.

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2002


                              280 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2002 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                  Toronto Star

                      July 19, 2002 Friday Ontario Edition

SECTION: OPINION; Pg. A25

LENGTH: 791 words

HEADLINE: Hormone replacement therapy Not always just what the doctor ordered

BYLINE: Jackie Smith

BODY:
Jackie Smith

   EVIDENCE FROM TWO major U.S. studies showing that long-term hormone
replacement therapy does more harm than good in post-menopausal women should
come as no surprise to many in the health community.

   History shows that when new medical treatments work, the benefits to patient
and society can be enormous: Drugs that cure debilitating and fatal infectious
diseases like syphilis and tuberculosis; vaccines that prevent smallpox and
polio; treatments that control asthma; surgeries that remove cancer and
eliminate birth defects. Frequent media stories of children with heart-breaking
deformities arriving at Toronto's Hospital for Sick Children for cure is
testament to the many benefits of modern medicine.

   When treatments don't work, the results range from useless to tragic. Note
the removal of women's ovaries for commonly diagnosed hysteria in the late 19th
and early 20th centuries, followed by lobotomies for mental illness and
tonsillectomies for sore throats.

   Or, more recently, the death of American teen Jesse Gelsinger from gene
therapy, putting a halt to human trials at the University of Pennsylvania's
Institute for Human Gene Therapy and an overhaul of its ethics review process.
Or that of 57-year-old Mike Hurewitz in New York City's Mount Sinai Hospital
last January from poor care after he donated part of his liver to his younger
brother.

   The sad fact is that despite huge progress in medicine in the last century,
the history of health care is full of stories of ineffective or harmful
treatments meted out to unwitting patients. Much medical care is given without
evidence of benefit, under risky circumstances and without truly informed
decision-making, turning patients into guinea pigs and wasting precious health
dollars. A recent story in the Medical Post noted that a quarter of a century
ago the deputy director at New York's Rockefeller Foundation was telling
physicians that only 15 to 20 per cent of doctors' interventions had been proved
to do more good than harm. Much remains the same.

   Hormone replacement therapy, or HRT, is a prime example of a treatment
thousands of physicians and millions of women bought into without sufficient
evidence of good effect, believing it would not only relieve hot flushes,
vaginal dryness and mood swings, which it does, but also preserve the hearts,
bones and youth of post-menopausal women.

   Last week after the U.S. National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute reported
that a five-year randomized controlled study of 16,000 women found a significant
increase of invasive breast cancer, heart disease, stroke and blood clots, in
women taking estrogen 0.625 mg and progestin 2.5 mg, the Society of
Obstetricians and Gynaecologists of Canada decided to review its clinical
guidelines, and advised women to consult their doctors, as they are doing.

   Now this week, the U.S. National Cancer Institute reports that a 20-year
observational study of 44,000 women has found a significantly higher risk of
ovarian cancer in women who've undergone hysterectomies and are taking estrogen
without the progestin used to protect against uterine cancer.

   Weighing the harms and benefits of treatments isn't always easy, especially
for doctors with heavy caseloads and patients with busy lives and limited
medical knowledge. The bombardment of studies and information dispensed by
researchers, pharmaceutical companies and media lauding the potential benefits
of the latest unproven treatments, adds to the problem.

   Nevertheless, doctors need to know that the therapies they prescribe will
help, not harm, their patients, and patients that any risks are worth the
benefits.

   It's part of providing and receiving ethical care in the doctor-patient
relationship. When the risk of a treatment causing a bad effect is very low, but
the potential effects of the risk very serious, such as stroke and cancer,
informed decision-making is even more important. The cost of millions of worried
women on single and combined HRT now consulting their doctors, not to mention
the cost of treatment for those who suffer or die from adverse effects, is but a
small example of the unintended results of ineffective or inappropriate care.

   The results of these two major HRT studies are a reminder to doctors and
patients that much more medical care needs to be based on good evidence, and
that we have truly entered a new era of buyer or patient beware, one in which
the best medicine is not necessarily what the doctor orders, but a healthy
skepticism for what the doctor orders.

   It's a message that applies to all patients, not just those on HRT.

   Jackie Smith is former nurse who consults in bioethics and has a degree in
bioethics from the University of Toronto.


LOAD-DATE: July 19, 2002


                              282 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2002 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                  Toronto Star

                     July 6, 2002 Saturday Ontario Edition

SECTION: NATIONAL REPORT; Pg. H03

LENGTH: 721 words

HEADLINE: New hope for 'bubble babies'

BYLINE: Prithi Yelaja, Toronto Star

HIGHLIGHT:
Cure apparent for children born without immune systems

BODY:
Prithi Yelaja

   THE RESTRICTED life of Ryan Whitman is still not so terrible as the
traditional fate of so-called "bubble babies," who typically live short,
isolated lives in sterile rooms.

   But even they have new hope now, thanks to the recent discovery of a probable
cure for the disorder.

   While Whitman was a normal boy until age 12, "bubble babies" are born without
immune systems and must be kept in isolation units from birth to protect them
from exposure to bacteria and viruses. They would inevitably die from common
infections, usually shortly after birth.

   Their fate was made famous in the 1976 movie The Boy In The Plastic Bubble,
starring John Travolta.

   The inherited disease, known as severe combined immune deficiency (SCID), is
rare, striking only about 50 children a year. It is different from the multiple
chemical sensitivities that afflict Whitman.

   The best-known victim was David Vetter, Houston's famous "bubble boy" who
spent all 12 years of his life in a plastic bubble filled with filtered air. He
died in 1984 when, at his insistence, doctors tried a bone marrow transplant.

   Children born with SCID lack an enzyme in their bone marrow called ADA, which
is essential to make disease-fighting immune cells, sometimes called white blood
cells. Until now, the only hope for these children was the transplant to replace
ADA-deficient cells, but matching donors were not always available.

   Moreover, timing was key. The transplant had to be done before the onset of
infection and in the first few weeks of the baby's life, when the donor marrow
takes hold most quickly.

   However, early treatment requires early diagnosis, which is difficult because
doctors do not routinely perform a test on newborns to count white blood cells.

   Now, Italian and Israeli researchers are reporting success in using gene
therapy to cure SCID. At a news conference in Jerusalem this week, scientists
who developed the cure said the new treatment transformed the bone marrow of two
children from an "immune-cell desert" into a healthy breeding ground for
infection-fighting agents, offering them a normal life.

   "It means good news for these patients. It was a 100 per cent lethal disease
before. Now we think we can cure them," Dr. Shimon Slavin, head of bone marrow
transplantation at Hadassah University Medical Centre in Jerusalem, said in a
phone interview.

   The first child in the world to be cured of the disease is 2-year-old
Salsabil Abu-Saed, who spent much of her life in germ-free isolation.

   Scientists have been trying to cure the disease by gene therapy for more than
a decade without success. They proved it was possible to alter stem cells so the
cells produced ADA, the missing enzyme. But when these altered cells were
injected into the patient, they had little effect because they were overwhelmed
by the diseased cells still in the patient's body.

   Slavin and his colleagues worked out a remedy. If they could give the altered
ADA-producing stem cells some kind of biological advantage, the cells would
succeed.

   They tested it on Salsabil when she was 7 months old. They removed some bone
marrow from her pelvis and purified her stem cells, then altered the stem cells
to contain the missing ADA enzyme.

   Slavin believes the treatment, called non-myeloblative conditioning, is the
key to success.

   "It's a mild treatment that suppresses the bone marrow but doesn't wipe it
out. We give one of the drugs used for transplant, but at a much lower dose to
make room for the engineered bone marrow to take hold and grow better."

   Within weeks, Salsabil's bone marrow was producing millions of white blood
cells, while levels of toxins in her bloodstream fell. After a month in
hospital, she went home. Today, she has a normally functioning immune system and
requires no further treatment, Slavin said.

   "When her brothers and sisters caught chicken pox, she was unaffected. She
went through the hard test and made it. She's a completely normal kid now."

   A second child was cured by the same treatment shortly after Salsabil at the
San Raffaele Telethon Institute for Gene Therapy in Milan, which collaborated in
developing the cure.

   Slavin said the treatment has potential to cure a range of genetic disorders,
such as Gaucher's disease, that require engineered stem cells.


GRAPHIC: AP FILE PHOTO BUBBLE BOY: David Vetter is seen in 1976 at his Texas
home, in the sterile environment that he could never leave. Now, the cure of
2-year-old Salsabil Abu-Saed, seen above on her father's lap with Dr. Shimon
Slavin, provides hope for other children afflicted with SCID.

LOAD-DATE: July 6, 2002


                              283 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2002 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                  Toronto Star

                      July 2, 2002 Tuesday Ontario Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A16

LENGTH: 453 words

HEADLINE: 'Bubble' baby cured of rare immune disorder

BYLINE: Jack Katzenell, ASSOCIATED PRESS

HIGHLIGHT:
New procedure means normal life for Palestinian girl

BODY:
A 2-year-old Palestinian girl who spent much of her life in germ-free isolation
met reporters yesterday, showing off her functioning immune system, repaired by
a new procedure that offers her and others with her disorder a normal life.

   Taher and Hayyam Abu-Saed, a Palestinian couple from Jerusalem, had been
childless for 10 years when their first son was born. He died soon after birth
of a rare hereditary disease, severe combined immunodeficiency system, or SCID,
often referred to as "bubble boy disease."

   The Abu-Saed's second child, a girl, also had the condition, but she was
cured thanks to a bone marrow transplant from a healthy baby brother.

   When the couple learned their fifth child, Salsabil, had SCID, there was no
donor available for her.

   "We thought she was doomed," Taher Abu-Saed said.

   Yet a bright-eyed and healthy-looking Salsabil appeared yesterday at a news
conference in Jerusalem, with the pediatrician who treated her and scientists
who developed the cure.

   Salsabil was the first baby in the world to be cured of the most acute form
of SCID by a new procedure developed in Israel and Italy, said Shmuel Slavin,
head of the immunology department at Hadassah University Medical Centre in
Jerusalem.

   Another child was cured by the same treatment shortly after at the San
Raffaele Telethon Institute for Gene Therapy in Milan, which collaborated in
developing the cure.

   Their form of SCID was caused by a gene flaw that blocks production of an
enzyme called ADA, which is essential to make disease-fighting immune cells. The
treatment consisted of injections of bone marrow stem cells that were altered to
contain the missing enzyme gene.

   Salsabil is now living at home. "When her brothers and sisters caught chicken
pox she was unaffected, because her natural immune system rejected it," said Dr.
Memet Aker, the pediatrician.

   Scientists had been trying to cure the disease by gene therapy for more than
a decade without success, said Zelig Eshhar, who holds the chair of immunology
at the Weizmann Institute of Science in Rehovot, Israel.

   Slavin's procedure offers the patient a chance of living without constant
treatment, Eshhar said. "Its great advantage is that it is with genetically
engineered stem cells only, and this gives them a selective advantage."

   Before the treatment became available, SCID sufferers were given enzymes,
which relieved their suffering but did not cure the disease, and they died
anyway, Slavin said.

   SCID is called the "bubble boy syndrome" because a Houston boy who had the
disease spent all 12 years of his life in a plastic bubble to protect him from
infection. He died in 1984 when doctors tried a bone marrow transplant.


GRAPHIC: RADU SIGHETI/reuters HEALTHY: Palestinian child Salsabil Abu-Saed sits
in her father's lap yesterday as Israeli scientist Shmuel Slavin looks on.

LOAD-DATE: July 2, 2002


                              287 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2002 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                  Toronto Star

                      June 28, 2002 Friday Ontario Edition

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. F01

LENGTH: 350 words

HEADLINE: Brief

BODY:
Colon cancer

   LAPAROSCOPY BENEFICIAL: A study in The Lancet suggests that laparoscopic
surgery to treat colon cancer could be more favourable than conventional open
surgery, with the potential to reduce complications, and hospital stay and to
increase survival. Patients treated with laparoscopy had a 60 per cent reduced
risk of tumour relapse and a relative risk reduction of 50 per cent for death
from all causes compared with those treated with open surgery.

   Diabetes

   NIGHT LIGHT MAY HELP: Leaving the light on at night could help prevent the
onset of diabetic retinopathy. It's believed that this form of retinal damage
might be initiated by oxygen deprivation to the inner layers of the retina in
darkness. A research letter in The Lancet suggests that diabetic patients might
benefit from night-time illumination during sleep, to reduce oxygen consumption
in the retina.

   Immune deficiency

   GENE THERAPY WORKS: The first successful treatment for "bubble babies" born
without immune systems uses genetically altered stem cells to completely reverse
severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID), a condition caused by the lack of an
essential enzyme, according to Science. The therapy has the potential to be
equally effective in curing similar genetic diseases, such as Gaucher's.

   Mental retardation

   GENE IDENTIFIED: A single gene on the X chromosome may trigger retardation
when the gene is abnormal, reports Science. Researchers found the mutated gene
in 1.5 per cent of males with unexplained mental retardation and say the
percentage, though small, is significant. They believe that more than 100 of the
approximately 1200 genes on the X chromosome are involved in brain development
and function.

   Perineal damage

   STITCHING METHOD EFFECTIVE: A simple, continuous stitching technique to
repair tears in the perineum after vaginal delivery can prevent one woman in six
from having pain ten days after childbirth, according to The Lancet. About 85
per cent of women who have a spontaneous vaginal birth experience damage to the
perineum and 69 per cent require stitches.


LOAD-DATE: June 28, 2002


                              289 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2002 Sun Media Corporation
                      London Free Press (Ontario, Canada)

                     June 19, 2002 Wednesday, Final Edition

SECTION: Business; Pg. C5

LENGTH: 455 words

HEADLINE: LORUS THERAPEUTICS SHARES JUMP NEARLY 14%

BYLINE: CP

DATELINE: TORONTO

BODY:

   Shares of Lorus Therapeutics Inc. shot up nearly 14 per cent yesterday after
the drug developer announced its lead cancer treatment drug will be tested in
multiple phase-two trials by a U.S. cancer researcher.

   Shares of the Toronto company closed up 12 cents to 99 cents -- a
13.79-per-cent jump -- in trading of more than 820,000 shares on the Toronto
stock market.

   The stock traded as high as $1.05 earlier in the day.

   Calling it a "major accomplishment," Lorus said preclinical, "phase one"
testing of its GTI-2040 cancer drug has been approved by the U.S. National
Cancer Institute.

   Lorus and the institute -- which is the U.S. government's principal cancer
research and training agency -- will work together to select "suitable
development programs for a number of clinical trials," Lorus said.

   Pharmaceutical developers must take new drugs through three phases of testing
before they can be approved for use. Entering phase two is considered
significant since it shows a drug has promise and greatly increases the chance
it will successfully be approved for market by health regulators.

   The latest tests will let Lorus evaluate GTI-2040 in more clinical trials
than originally planned, Lorus chief executive Dr. Jim Wright said.

   "A phase-two clinical trial is usually a trial that starts to test the
efficacy, that is how well the drug will work," he said. "The more clinical
trials you can do against different kinds of cancers, the more opportunity you
get to test the drug."

   The NCI will sponsor trials conducted with GTI-2040 alone or in combination
with other cancer therapies. Lorus will manufacture and provide drug for all
trials under the collaboration, the company said.

   The drug is already being investigated in a phase-two clinical trial in
combination with another drug, capecitabine, for the treatment of renal cell
carcinoma at Wake Forest University in North Carolina.

   In the meantime, Lorus, which employs about 45 people in west-end Toronto, is
also diversifying by exploring to further develop its so-called antisense tech-
nology that limits the side- effects from cancer treatment, Wright said.

   While most anti-cancer drugs tend to be non-specific in the way they inhibit
proteins which allow cancers to grow -- thus resulting in side-effects such as
hair loss and vomiting -- antisense technology is very specific and reduces such
side-effects.

   Wright also said biotech companies need to diversify the technologies they
research and develop, much like mutual funds diversify their investment
portfolios to limit risk.

   This "mitigates the risk" associated with the biotech sector, he said.

   His company, for example, pursues gene therapy and antisense technology,
among others.

LOAD-DATE: June 19, 2002


                              293 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2002 Sun Media Corporation
                      London Free Press (Ontario, Canada)

                      May 28, 2002 Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: Opinion Pages; Pg. A7

LENGTH: 629 words

HEADLINE: 'MEAN GENE' COULD HELP HUMANITY

BYLINE: SHARON OSVALD, LONDON FREELANCE WRITER

BODY:

   It is inevitable. There's one in every crowd. There's one in every classroom,
boardroom, workplace, dorm, on every highway and, nine times out of 10, there's
one sitting in the car behind you at a red light.

   Even in a crowd of charitable do-gooders, you'll find at least one nasty
person whose mission in life is to make everyone around them unhappy. One
wonders what makes some people so mean. Are they wired badly or something?

   Lately, I've been hearing a great deal about the international human genome
project. Begun in the United States in 1990, the human genome project was
co-ordinated by the U.S. Department of Energy and the National Institutes of
Health. By 2003, they expect to have completed project goals, such as
identifying the approximately 30,000 genes in human DNA and determining the
sequences of the three billion chemical base pairs that make up human DNA. The
information will be stored in data bases and these related technologies will be
transferred to the private sector. The co-ordinators are also to address any
ethical, legal and social issues that may arise because of the project.

   One of the genes found in this project was the so-called mean gene that is
said to be the explanation for greed, infidelity, gambling and all kinds of
nasty behaviour. Harvard economist Terry Burnham and UCLA biologist Jay Phelan
have been studying the mean gene for 10 years. According to these guys, the mean
gene is what makes us overeat, get in debt and take risks. In their book, Mean
Genes, they state, "Genetically, we are still cavewomen and cavemen, despite our
living in ultramodern homes. This mismatch between our genes' natural world and
the modern world causes us many problems."

   Drug addiction, obesity, gambling and bankruptcy, according to Burnham and
Phelan, are partially attributed to our genetic design clashing with our modern
world.

   In 1965, a group of scientists claimed to have discovered a so-called crime
gene. They claimed violent criminals had an extra male chromosome that nice
folks didn't have. Later it was admitted the test samples had all been taken
from a single high-security mental hospital and that 96 per cent of the
population with the XYY chromosomes lived quiet, normal lives.

   In the U.S. recently, a lawyer attempted to use the mean gene as a defence
for his client, claiming the man's family was riddled with murderers, rapists
and the like due to a genetic disadvantage. That defence was dismissed when it
was discovered the same man was related to a series of brilliant entrepreneurs
and businesspeople.

   Still, the idea is an attractive one. Wouldn't it be great if we could treat
all social problems medically? If we could isolate defective "jerk" genes and
repair those genes with gene therapy the way we seek to eliminate conditions
such as cystic fibrosis, depression and schizophrenia, I'd spearhead the
campaign myself.

   Setting aside issues such as ethics, morality and people's personal rights
and freedoms (only for a moment), imagine what it would be like if you could
diagnose and treat the person who makes your life a misery. Think of the
possibilities. The bullies at school could wear little fanny-packs each day with
a little device similar to what we use for allergic reactions.

   As soon as the child begins pushing or name-calling, the teacher could say,
"Billy is having a mean gene reaction, quick get the pen." For adults, it would
have to be more subtle, perhaps a little coffee creamer laced with the
anti-cranky antidote would be just the thing to add to your boss's coffee in the
morning or perhaps prior to your job performance review.

   I know there'd be pharmaceutical and insurance companies who would try to
profit from this, but, just think, we could treat them, too.

NOTES:
Sharon Osvald is a London freelance writer. Her column appears Tuesdays.

LOAD-DATE: May 28, 2002


                              296 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2002 Sun Media Corporation
                      London Free Press (Ontario, Canada)

                       May 10, 2002 Friday, Final Edition

SECTION: City & Region; Pg. B1; The City

LENGTH: 714 words

HEADLINE: SPIRITUALITY EMBRACES SCIENCE AS PART OF WHOLE

BYLINE: IAN GILLESPIE, FREE PRESS COLUMNIST

BODY:

   At first glance, it looks like a normal science fair.

   There's an assortment of displays about tornadoes, hummingbirds, ladybugs and
planets here in the gym of Wiiji Nimbawiyaang elementary school on the Chippewas
of the Thames First Nation reserve, near Delaware.

   There's a pyramid-shaped pile of juice boxes labelled Ancient Egyptian
Architecture.

   There's a project entitled How Jet Engines Work. When I ask the obvious
question, the boy standing beside the display inflates a balloon and lets the
air hiss out.

   There's an exhibit about lung cancer. There's one about snails. There's one
about preserving flowers that features dandelions immersed in cloudy test tubes,
with an accompanying text that concludes, "The water-only dandelion lasted the
longest. Then I think the one that lasted second longest was the toothpaste and
water."

   There's an investigation of dish soaps. There's a pile of popsicle sticks
illustrating the principles of the first-class lever. There's even a display
about the Bermuda Triangle.

   Yep. Looks like a run-of-the-mill elementary school science fair.
   Well, almost.
   Two displays are different.
 One is Wade Young's project on a Sweat Lodge. Next to a model of the native
people's ceremonial site, there's a description of how participants "listen to
the echoes of our communicator" and "see with your inner eye."

   And there's Kelsey Riley's display of Four Sacred Medicines -- sage, tobacco,
sweet grass and cedar.

   "Everything in life has a significance," writes Riley, "and is honoured and
respected."

   Funny. I remember the Periodic Table. I recall Newton's three laws of motion.
But I don't remember anything about respect and honour.

   That doesn't sound like science. That sounds like, ah, spirituality.
    Exactly, says Neil Jones.
 "The whole notion of western science is embodied in a reluctance to incorporate
any spirituality," says Jones, executive director of the Canadian Aboriginal
Science and Technology Society, a federally funded group aimed at getting more
aboriginals into science programs and careers.

   "Because by definition, if it's not explainable and reproducible and can be
broken down, then it's not science."

   Raised near Sault Ste. Marie, Jones holds a master's degree in science and
biology from the University of Ottawa.

   He's an aboriginal and a scientist -- two elements that rarely mix.

   Jones says there are many reasons why native people are under-represented in
the sciences, including social problems and a lack of role models.

   But one big reason is the difference between how western scientists and
aboriginals see the world.

   Western science divides the world into myriad elements, but aboriginals see
it as an interconnected whole infused with an all-embracing spirit.

   For Jones, that gap leapt into focus while working with Environment Canada on
endocrine disruption in fish -- or how pollution was reversing the gender of
some fish.

   "We were taking samples," he recalls. "And I suggested to my boss that I
should give thanks to the fish that were offering their lives for us to get a
better understanding of this."

   His boss didn't object. So Jones spread bits of tobacco -- an aboriginal
gesture of thanks -- along the shoreline.
    That might sound wacky to some.
 But for Jones, it reaffirmed his belief that when something is taken, something
must be returned -- even if that something is a spiritual gesture.
   Logan Hill understands that.
 Hill is a fourth-year biology student at University of Western Ontario. He's
also an aboriginal who spent the first 10 years of his life on the Six Nations
Reserve near Brantford.

   Hill, who's here to help judge the Wiiji science fair, says he's interested
in genetics.

   But he's heading into that brave new future with his traditional beliefs
intact.

   "There's a give and take," he says, adding he never views something as an
unconnected, isolated object.

   "There's a definite balance -- it's a dance. You take something, but you have
to give thanks for that."

   I don't know about you. But if scientists are mucking around with stem cells
and gene therapy and the essence of life itself, I'd like to have some folks
like Hill -- or Young and Riley -- wearing the white coats and peering into the
petri dishes.

NOTES:
Ian Gillespie's column appears Wednesday, Friday and Saturday. He can be reached
at 667-4507; outside the London dialling area 1-800-265-4105, ext. 4507. E-mail
him at igillespie@lfpress.com

GRAPHIC: photo by Derek Ruttan, The London Free Press; SWEET TIP: Colton
Hendrick, 12, points to the subject of his scence fair project at Wiiji
Nimbawiyaang elementary school. The purpose of the project was to discover what
area of the tongue detects sweetness. Hendrick concluded it was the tip of the
tongue.; OPINION

LOAD-DATE: May 10, 2002


                              301 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2002 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                  Toronto Star

                      May 2, 2002 Thursday Ontario Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A25

LENGTH: 563 words

HEADLINE: Scientists pinpoint genes that may slow lung cancer

BYLINE: Maggie Fox, Reuters News Agency

HIGHLIGHT:
Researchers hope to begin experiments on humans in months

BODY:
Scientists said yesterday they had discovered three genes involved in lung
cancer and when they replaced the genes in mice the cancer stopped spreading and
in some cases was cured.

   Based on these findings, researchers said they hoped to begin gene therapy
experiments in lung cancer patients within a year.

   The three genes not only slowed the growth and spread of lung cancer tumours,
but seemed to cause them to die off, the researchers at M.D. Anderson Cancer
Centre and the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Centre in Dallas report
in this week's issue of the journal Cancer Research.

   The results are so impressive that Dr. Jack Roth, who helped lead the study,
and colleague Dr. John Minna of the University of Texas have won permission from
the National Institutes of Health committee that monitors gene therapy to start
experiments in cancer patients. Roth said the team is awaiting approval from the
Food and Drug Administration and will examine toxicity, side effects and safety.
Only patients with advanced lung cancer will be experimented on at first.

   The team injected human lung cancer tumours into mice bred to lack proper
immune systems. Such mice easily develop human cancer tumours.

   "You can do several things - you can grow the tumour and just inject the gene
into the tumour and it will regress," Roth said. An intravenous infusion of the
genes also shrank tumours, even those that had metastasized or spread, he said.

   The three genes - 01F6, NPRL2 and FUS1 - are found on the same region of
chromosome 3, he said.

   "If you analyze the DNA in lung cancers you find that pieces of this
chromosome are missing in many lung cancers," Roth said in a telephone
interview. "It is about the most common area for missing DNA that you can find
in lung cancer."

   Smoking is the main cause of lung cancer, the world's leading cancer killer.
Smoking seems to damage this area of the chromosome very early on, Roth said.
"You even see it in cells lining the trachea and the bronchial tubes that look
completely normal in patients who are heavy smokers."

   Some people seem to have more delicate chromosomes than others, the
researchers found, which could explain why a few people can smoke without
developing cancer.

   Ten years ago, Minna identified this delicate region of the chromosome, which
is also involved in many cases of breast cancer.

   "It is only with advances in human genome sequencing that we identified these
three genes," Minna said in a telephone interview. "We thought we were just
going to find one gene and amazingly, there are probably going to be four or
five genes in this area that are tumour-suppressor genes."

   Replacing these missing genes, which instruct cells with faulty DNA to
self-destruct, should stop the cancer.

   Gene therapy has been under a cloud since the death in 1999 of an 18-year-old
gene therapy patient. The U.S. government has cracked down on researchers, who
are now aware that what seemed like a very safe approach may in fact be
dangerous.

   Often a virus is used to carry the new genes into a patient. But Roth said
his team had developed what they hope is a safer method.

   They have encased the DNA for the FUS1 gene in a lipid, or fatty covering,
that will be infused into the patients intravenously. If it seems safe, they
will advance to trials that test whether it affects the cancer.


LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2002


                              305 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2002 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                  Toronto Star

                     April 19, 2002 Friday Ontario Edition

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. F02

LENGTH: 938 words

HEADLINE: Trying new drugs on humans is risky but necessary

BODY:
Clinical trials, testing drugs or medical devices on human subjects, is
something few people talked about or knew about 20 years ago. Now, they're the
hot potato du jour. So hot is the subject of clinical trials and so greatly have
they proliferated - 50,000 in the U.S. and several thousand in Canada - that
Time magazine this week devoted its cover story to the subject.

   But the cover illustration of a human being in a cage and the reference to
guinea pigs did nothing to gladden the hearts of 2,200 members of the
Association of Clinical Research Professionals meeting at the Convention Centre
in Toronto this week.

   They were already sensitive about the questionable reputation of clinical
research and indeed at last year's meeting had chewed on that distasteful topic
at length.

   "The focus this year was not so much on the negative," says ACRP chairman of
the board Dennis DeRosia. "Our fear was that by focusing on the sensationalism,
we could scare people."

   Nevertheless, speakers at the conference included the father and the lawyer
of Jesse Gelsinger, the young man who died in September, 1999 during a gene
therapy study at the University of Pennsylvania. And one conference session was
titled "Fraud and Noncompliance: Face Them or Hide From Them!" There were plenty
of sessions, too, about ethics and informed consent.

   Negative publicity is one of the most pressing concerns of the ACRP,
acknowledges DeRosia.

   "Here's Time magazine on newsstands everywhere, with a picture of a person in
a cage and a story along the lines of how millions of us have been turned into
guinea pigs. What image does that give you? The story dwells at length on some
of the worst incidents that have occurred. It's disproportionate."

   It's true that millions of people go through clinical trials safely and that
there are only a few deaths. On the other hand, it's true that even one death
that might have prevented by more rigour or more attention or better screening
is one too many.

   But it's also true, as DeRosia emphasizes, that clinical research is a
necessary and beneficial process.

   Our society has mostly moved beyond warfare. We've turned our attention and
our resources to fighting disease. If clinical trials are the frontlines, we
should think of people who enter them not as human guinea pigs but as volunteers
in this war.

   "Is it possible to do clinical trials without risk?" asks DeRosia
rhetorically. "Regrettably, no. In order to eliminate the risk you have to know
the answer. If we knew the answer we wouldn't have to do the clinical trial."

   This reality has led to huge problems with recruiting people for studies.
(DeRosia during our conversation referred to them first as "patients" and then
asked that the word be changed to "subjects.")

   According to the ACRP, 87 per cent of clinical research trials are delayed
because there aren't enough volunteers for them. With more drugs being
developed, the number of clinical trials is increasing exponentially as new
combinations are tested and drugs are tested against each other.

   "The need for clinical trial participants is reaching a critical mass as the
available subject pool shrinks," warns the ACRP. "Without human subjects,
clinical researchers cannot adequately test therapies desperately need ...."

   Meanwhile, there are many people who are desperate to enter drug trials but
may be turned away.

   Patients who have reached the end of the line with standard treatment cling
to the hope of experimental drugs in clinical trials. This is especially true
for terminal cancer patients. They are willing to risk being given a placebos or
drugs that don't work or that have awful side effects because they have nothing
to lose and at least a clinical trial offers hope.

   Both recruiters and patients are using the Internet to find each other on
such sites as www.centerwatch.com, health.yahoo.com and www.medline.com.

   "Our greatest pressure," says DeRosia about researchers carrying out clinical
trials, "comes from people who read in some magazine, or maybe your newspaper,
about some 'great scientific breakthrough.' I'll guarantee that the day that
news comes out, whatever institution or company is mentioned will be flooded
with calls from around the world. 'I want that drug, how can you deny it, my
mother's dying of this disease.' What they're saying is, 'You've got to go
faster, why isn't this available?'."

   Desperation to try experimental drugs isn't limited only to terminal cancer
patients. Time cites a psoriasis sufferer who found relief only with a drug
being tested in a clinical trial. Unfortunately, when the trial ended, so did
access to the drug.

   It's also a fact that clinical trials are no longer pure scientific research.
They're tainted by affiliation with the huge global pharmaceutical companies
that underwrite most of them and therefore, to a greater or lesser extent,
control most of them.

   As well, the industry that clinical trials have become has given rise to
for-profit companies that organize and co-ordinate trials and sites (many trials
are conducted at sites scattered around the world), oversee collection of data,
provide personnel, and recruit subjects.

   DeRosia founded one of the first contract research organizations in 1978 and
heads one of the biggest, Kendle International in Cincinnati. He says they're
necessary for efficiency and speed. Medical researchers resent these outside
companies, accusing them of distorting data, bottom-line thinking and payment of
recruitment bonuses.

   This war is a big one; the skirmishes and battles are many.

   jgerstel @ thestar.ca.


LOAD-DATE: April 19, 2002


                              306 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2002 Sun Media Corporation
                      London Free Press (Ontario, Canada)

                     April 18, 2002 Thursday, Final Edition

SECTION: Lifestyles; Pg. C7

LENGTH: 187 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY SEEMS TO CURE BUBBLE BOYS

BYLINE: AP

BODY:

   In the most striking success yet for gene therapy, French doctors have
apparently cured four little boys of the rare and deadly immune system disorder
dubbed "bubble boy disease."

   The boys, followed for up to 2 1/2 years, now have healthy immune systems,
are growing normally and live at home after spending their first months in a
sterile environment because they could not fight off disease.

   The immune system of a fifth boy was partially restored and he is improving
with other treatment.

   The doctors reported initial success with the first two patients two years
ago; the update in yesterday's New England Journal of Medicine shows the
treatment is still working.

   "This is the first instance in which an otherwise fatal disease has been
treated with gene therapy as the only treatment and the disease was reversed,"
said Dr. Jennifer Puck, head of the immunologic genetics section at the National
Human Genome Research Institute.

   The gene therapy was given to the boys in 1999 and 2000 when they were
babies; the youngest was a month old, the oldest 11 months. The oldest of the
boys is now about four.

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 2002


                              307 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2002 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                  Toronto Star

                    April 18, 2002 Thursday Ontario Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A14

LENGTH: 700 words

HEADLINE: 4 French 'bubble boys' cured by gene therapy

BYLINE: Linda A. Johnson, Associated Press

HIGHLIGHT:
But Arizona father whose son died seeks better safety rules for worldwide
research

BODY:
In the most striking success yet for gene therapy, French doctors appear to have
cured four little boys of the rare and deadly immune system disorder dubbed
"bubble boy disease."

   The boys, followed for up to 21/2 years, now have healthy immune systems, are
growing normally and live at home after spending their first months in a sterile
environment because they could not fight off disease.

   The immune system of a fifth boy was partly restored and he is improving with
other treatment.

   The doctors two years ago reported initial success with the first two
patients; the update in today's New England Journal of Medicine shows the
treatment is still working.

   "This is the first instance in which an otherwise fatal disease has been
treated with gene therapy as the only treatment and the disease was reversed,"
said Dr. Jennifer M. Puck, head of immunologic genetics, at the National Human
Genome Research Institute. "This is exciting and it's important."

   The gene therapy was given to the boys in 1999 and 2000 when they were
babies; the youngest was a month old, the oldest 11 months. The oldest of the
boys is now about 4.

   Puck, who was not involved in the research, said scientists are getting
better at gene therapy experiments, but so far patients treated for other
disorders still need regular, expensive medication to survive.

   The study is welcome news for gene therapy, which suffered a setback when an
experiment killed an Arizona teenager at the University of Pennsylvania in 1999.
That death raised fears the experiments might be too dangerous and led to
efforts to increase safety.

   On Tuesday in Toronto, Paul Gelsinger told his son Jesse's story to an
international conference for clinical researchers at the Metro Convention
Centre. He warned that science cannot forget humanity as it races to unlock the
body's genetic mysteries.

   He is pushing for greater regulation of gene therapy research in the United
States, but says it can be a leader and push other countries to follow suit, The
Star's Karen Palmer reported.

   After Jesse Gelsinger's death, it became clear the two-year U.S. trial was
flawed: patients had signed consent forms without understanding the nature of
the research; researchers had misled regulators about results and adverse
reactions; and the lead researcher was in conflict, because his private firm
would profit from marketing of the gene therapy.

   The five French boys were born with severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID),
an inherited disease that occurs about 1 in every 75,000 births. The best-known
victim was David, Houston's famous "bubble boy" who lived in a germ-proof
plastic enclosure until his death at 12 in 1984.

   The French boys had X-linked SCID, a severe form that strikes only boys. It
is the most common form of SCID, accounting for about half the cases.

   Genetic mutation denied them a crucial protein. They could not make two types
of infection-fighting immune cells, and a third type did not work, leaving them
open to infection.

   Many babies with the disorder are now saved with bone marrow transplants, but
they need monthly intravenous infusions of immune globulin, antibodies culled
from donated blood, for the rest of their lives.

   Doctors at Necker Hospital in Paris drew bone marrow from the boys. They
culled stem cells from their marrow and mixed them with a harmless virus in
which a gene that makes the missing protein was inserted. For each boy, after
the virus had infected his bone marrow cells, millions were injected into his
bloodstream.

   Repeated tests showed the bone marrow cells continue to make the immune cells
the boys once lacked. Also, the four have been inoculated against some childhood
diseases - shots that once would have killed them.

   Sonia Skarlatos, gene therapy co-ordinator at the National Heart, Lung and
Blood Institute, said the results do not prove the boys' immune systems have
been permanently repaired.

   Some of the boys' stem cells still have the defective gene but enough have
the normal one to give them a good immune system, she said, noting the approach
eventually could work for other genetic diseases, including hemophilia and
another form of SCID.


LOAD-DATE: April 18, 2002


                              310 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2002 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                  Toronto Star

                     March 9, 2002 Saturday Ontario Edition

SECTION: NEW IN HOMES; Pg. M02

LENGTH: 493 words

HEADLINE: Mattamy model named best

BYLINE: Star staff and wire services

BODY:
Mattamy Homes' Tothburg II model at Hawthorne Village in Milton was named best
show home during the recent Canadian Homebuilders' Association national
conference in Victoria.

   The national sales and marketing awards celebrate excellence and superior
performance in the new home building industry.

   Closer to home, last year Mattamy the Greater Toronto Homebuilders'
Association named the company Home Builder of the Year.

   Mattamy Homes is currently building nine developments across the GTA. For
information about Hawthorne Village call 905-875-2692 or log on to
www.mattamyhomes.com.

   Housing starts remain

   higher than late '90s

   The Canadian Home Builders' Association predicts 156,000 homes will be built
in Canada this year, down from a high of almost 163,000 in 2001.

   But despite the drop, the association noted that, in most regions, housing
starts are still expected to be above average compared to the late 1990s.

   The findings of the association's bi-annual Pulse survey were released during
its recent annual conference in Victoria. The report said builders continue to
worry about the shortage of skilled labour in the industry, a shortage they say
will increase their costs.

   The incoming CHBA president, Edmonton builder Greg Christenson, called on all
levels of government to address barriers to housing affordability.

   Win your dream home

   in lottery for hospital

   Fourteen furnished and professionally decorated houses are among the prizes
in the Princess Margaret Home Lottery 2002.

   The grand prize showhomes include 12 detached houses by Greenpark in
Kleinburg, Oakville, Mississauga, Vaughan, Unionville and Richmond Hill, valued
between $325,000 and $850,000. The houses will be ready for occupancy May 21 or
June 18.

   Other prizes include two condominiums, worth $425,000 each, in a gothic-style
glass tower by Diamante Development. Located in the Domus building in mid-town
Toronto on McAlpine St. near Yonge, the first suite is a 1,167-square-foot unit
on the second floor and the other is a 983-square-foot unit on the fourth floor.

   The lottery has more than 13,000 prizes, including cars, boats, vacations and
home electronics. Tickets cost $100 each. Money raised will be used to set up a
cell processing facility at Princess Margaret Hospital to develop gene therapy
treatments - the first such facility in Canada. For lottery information, call
416-650-7888 or 1-866-631-1234.

   Garden tool site

   has useful tips

   Okay. So the weather outside is frightful. But you can dream of spring by
logging on to www.vbmfg.com for tips on getting your garden into shape. This Web
site was recently launched by V & B Manufacturing Co., a U.S. garden tool
producer.

   There are instructions to be found on do-it-yourself projects: tree planting,
installing a brick block retaining wall, edging installation. Click on
landscaping tips and you'll have a lesson on easy garden maintenance.

   IN SHORT


LOAD-DATE: March 9, 2002


                              311 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2002 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                  Toronto Star

                      March 1, 2002 Friday Ontario Edition

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. F06

LENGTH: 553 words

HEADLINE: Biological advances carry their own risks

BYLINE: W. Wayt Gibbs, Special To The Star ; SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN

BODY:
In labs across the United States and Europe, dozens of geneticists are working
to create stealthy viruses that can deliver artificially engineered payloads
into cells without detection by the immune system.

   Other scientists have experimented with the influenza A pathogen and
discovered that an infectious virus can be assembled from just eight DNA loops,
easily synthesized by a machine.

   A year ago we would only have marvelled at the ingenuity of such researchers,
who, after all, are simply trying to perfect gene therapies for inherited
diseases and to find new drugs for contagious illnesses.

   Now, having witnessed the first attack with biological weapons against the
U.S. government and media, biologists are more aware of the other edge of the
swords they forge.

   Biotechnology is speeding up, shrinking down and automating the work of
genetically engineering micro-organisms.

   "You can now finish before lunch projects that used to consume a Ph.D.
thesis," says Gigi Kwik, a fellow at Johns Hopkins University's Center for
Civilian Biodefense Studies.

   Scientists joke darkly that it used to take a precocious high school student
to make a bioweapon. Today, with the help of pre-packaged kits and automated DNA
synthesizers, just about anyone can do it.

   That is an exaggeration, but more could be done to stall the day when
miscreant engineers can create novel pathogens that resist antibiotics or that
wreak havoc by tricking the immune system into attacking the body.

   A law passed in the U.S. last October makes it a crime to possess "biological
agents" except for research or medical uses. It also requires drug and
background checks on lab workers who handle certain lethal microbes.

   "We don't have a good handle on what pathogens are where," says Amy Smithson,
a bioterrorism expert at the Henry L. Stimson Center in Washington.

   "Those regulations should be in place worldwide," she says.

   "Are the safeguards in place appropriate? So far I believe they are," says
Carl Feldbaum, president of the Washington-based Biotechnology Industry
Organization. "But are they sufficient? Probably not. I think we need to start
thinking now about controlling the availability and export of those types of new
instruments that could make it possible for a novice to create a dangerous
biological agent."

   No special licence is required to export DNA synthesizers and sequencers and
other automated machines that can make it much easier to engage in the genetic
engineering of micro-organisms. Applied Biosystems, the leading vendor of such
equipment, has its headquarters in California as well as branch offices in
Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Saudi Arabia and 60 other countries.

   That doesn't necessarily mean that wealthy, determined terrorists could whip
up a batch of lethal vaccine- resistant bacteria without killing themselves.

   Feldbaum says that biotech industry leaders are already talking with
government officials about restricting the export of some high-tech equipment.
But it is far less likely that certain biological research will be classified in
the way that nuclear research has.

   "We just don't think that top down, command-and-control style regulation of
scientists will work," Kwik says. "Academics would fight it tooth and nail, and
who can blame them?"


LOAD-DATE: March 1, 2002


                              312 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2002 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                  Toronto Star

                      March 1, 2002 Friday Ontario Edition

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. F06

LENGTH: 528 words

HEADLINE: Breakthrough may help Fragile X sufferers

BYLINE: Prithi Yelaja, Toronto Star

BODY:
Researchers at Toronto Western Hospital have discovered a domino effect in
protein development that causes Fragile X syndrome, the most common form of
inherited mental impairment.

   They hope the findings lead to new drug therapy that would allow children
with the syndrome to begin learning normally.

   Currently, there is no treatment for Fragile X, a little understood and often
misdiagnosed ailment, which is caused by a defect on the X chromosome. It is
known to affect 1 in 2,000 males and 1 in 4,000 females, but the real numbers
may be higher because it is often misdiagnosed.

   Doctors often don't recognize the symptoms, which range from attention
deficit hyperactivity disorder to severe mental retardation.

   In mild cases, a child with Fragile X may simply be classified as "not too
smart," says Dr. Peter Carlen, a senior scientist at Toronto Western Research
Institute and the study's principal investigator. "People often have this
syndrome and they're not very severely sick - they're just not too swift at
school. Or it can be misdiagnosed as anxiety, hyperactivity, seizures, autism,
so it's often missed."

   Doctors have known for nearly a decade that when a particular gene on the X
chromosome - the FMR1 - is defective, the body is unable to make a cellular
protein called Fragile X mental retardation protein. But they didn't understand
the link between the missing protein and mental disabilities.

   "What we found is an abnormality of nerve cell communication," says Carlen.

   The research findings, published in Molecular And Cellular Neuroscience, show
that the lack of FMR1 is linked to another protein, GluR1, which is in the
cerebral cortex part of the brain that is crucial for learning. GluR1 plays a
key role in communication between brain cells. Without sufficient levels of
GluR1, neurons in the cerebral cortex can't properly receive electrochemical
messages from neighbouring neurons and this, in turn, impedes learning and
memory.

   Researchers discovered this by comparing the functioning of the brains of
regular mice with those of mice genetically modified to suffer from Fragile X
syndrome.

   Gene therapy may ultimately prove to correct the gene defect, but in the
meantime, identification of the missing proteins opens the door for targeted
drug therapy, Carlen says. Clinical trials are set to start in the U.S. with a
class of drugs called ampakines, which are currently being tested for
Alzheimer's disease.

   Dr. Carlo Paribello, a family physician in Brampton and president of the
Fragile X Research Foundation of Canada, which funded the study, calls the
findings "tremendously exciting."

   Two of Paribello's four sons have Fragile X syndrome. They are integrated
into a regular school but take a modified curriculum and have a full-time
teaching assistant.

   When they were first diagnosed with Fragile X in 1995, Paribello had never
heard of it.

   "At the time it felt like a death, like a loss, because you have an image of
what your children are going to be like and all of a sudden they're not going to
be like that," he says. "This study gives me hope not just for my sons, but for
future generations."


LOAD-DATE: March 1, 2002


                              314 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2002 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                  Toronto Star

                   February 23, 2002 Saturday Ontario Edition

SECTION: NEW IN HOMES; Pg. M02

LENGTH: 591 words

HEADLINE: Homes for the winning

BYLINE: Star staff and wire services

BODY:
Fourteen furnished homes in the Toronto area are among the prizes in the
Princess Margaret Home Lottery 2002. The grand prize show-homes include 12
detached houses by Greenpark in Kleinburg, Oakville, Mississauga, Vaughan,
Unionville and Richmond Hill, valued between $325,000 and $850,000. The houses
will be ready for occupancy May 21 or June 18.

   Other prizes include two condos, worth $425,000 each, in a gothic-style glass
tower by Diamante Development. Located in the Domus building in mid-town Toronto
on McAlpine St. near Yonge, the first suite is a 1,167-square-foot unit on the
second floor; the other, a 983-square-foot unit on the fourth floor.

   The lottery has more than 13,000 prizes, including cars, boats, vacations and
home electronics. Tickets cost $100 each. Money raised will be used to set up a
cell processing facility at Princess Margaret Hospital to develop gene therapy
treatments - the first such facility in Canada. For lottery information, call
416-650-7888 or 1-866-631-1234.

   Preview nets

   a dozen sales

   Heathwood Homes sold 12 homes last weekend when it unveiled its new selection
of semis, towns and singles at a preview for its Mississauga project, the
Neighbourhoods of Churchill in Erin Mills. The grand opening starts today.

   The veteran builder decided to offer designs with girth: the semis are 24
feet wide, and townhouses, 20 feet across. The 34 semis range from 1,786 square
feet to 2,388 square feet, and are priced from $218,900 to $249,000. The 69
townhouses are from 1,787 to 2,396 square feet in size and priced from $204,900
to $234,900. Also available are 20 single family homes on 40-foot lots priced
from the low $300,000s.

   For the grand opening this weekend, Heathwood is offering $2,000 in extras
for the semis and towns, and $3,000 for the detached. The project is located on
the southwest corner of Eglinton Ave. and Winston Churchill Blvd., and is close
to highways, GO Transit, and Erin Mills Town Centre.

   Call 905-607-3939 or visit the Web site www.heathwood.com.

   U.S. housing gives economy a boost

   U.S. housing starts rose in January to the highest level in almost two years,
a sign the market for new homes is helping underpin the economy, government
statistics showed.

   Builders south of the border started work on 1.678 million homes at an annual
pace last month, up 6.3 per cent from the revised 1.579 million-unit pace in
December, the U.S. Commerce Department said. That compares with an average 1.43
million homes started each year in the last decade.

   A 30-year fixed mortgage rate that fell to a record low of 6.45 per cent in
November spurred sales and boosted orders at builders including Beazer Homes
Inc. and Standard Pacific Corp. It also led to increased profits at Pulte Homes
Inc., the largest builder in the United States, and that may continue this year.

   Housing "has been tremendously resilient," said Carol Stone, an economist at
Nomura Securities International Inc. in New York. Starts in January were the
strongest since a 1.745 million-unit pace in February, 2000.

   Hardware for homeowners

   What are the three hardware products a first-time homeowner should purchase?
Ace Hardware surveyed its retail owners and managers at a recent company
convention. Topping the list were:

   Paint: 31 per cent of 108 retailers recommended this.

   Hand and power tool essentials, plus a toolbox for storage: 23 per cent
surveyed voted for this.

   Light bulbs: 22 per cent had this bright idea.

   Briefly


LOAD-DATE: February 23, 2002


                              316 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2002 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                  Toronto Star

                    February 18, 2002 Monday Ontario Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A07

LENGTH: 478 words

HEADLINE: Flies shed light on blindness

BYLINE: Paul Tadich, SPECIAL TO THE STAR

HIGHLIGHT:
U of T work may lead to cure of degenerative vision loss

BODY:
A University of Toronto scientist has unravelled the mechanism of a genetic
defect that can waste a person's sight - and his discovery may one day lead to a
cure for degenerative blindness.

   Dr. Ulrich Tepass, an associate professor in U of T's zoology department, has
shown that a gene called CRB1 is responsible for the development and maintenance
of the light-sensitive cells in the retina. His results were published yesterday
in the science journal Nature.

   "Approximately 100,000 Canadians have degenerative vision loss," says Sharon
Colle, a spokesperson for the Foundation Fighting Blindness.

   "Because we value sight so much, this discovery is of great interest to us.
We look to a future where everyone's daily activities are not curtailed by
blindness."

   But Tepass - along with graduate student Milena Pellikka and doctoral fellow
Guy Tanentzapf - didn't set out to study human vision. They began by
investigating how genes influence the functioning of eye cells in the humble
fruit fly.

   "We have worked for more than 10 years on the fruit fly," said Tepass, "and
it is much easier to analyze gene function there than in humans."

   Over the course of that decade, Tepass studied a gene called Crumbs and
learned it regulates the development of the part of the fly retina that is
sensitive to light.

   As part of his analysis, Tepass made mutations in the Crumbs gene. Flies
carrying the mutation lacked functioning light-sensitive cells.

   But Tepass saw a human connection to his research when he discovered that
victims of retinitis pigmentosa - a hereditary disease characterized by a slow
wasting of the retina, leading to blindness - often carry mutations in their
CRB1 genes.

   So he used the data pouring out of the Human Genome Project to compare the
DNA structures of Crumb and CRB1. A computer search revealed that the two genes
were related.

   Spurred by this finding, Tepass' team performed an experiment using
sophisticated microscope techniques that showed that Crumb and CRB1 were
virtually interchangeable in maintaining retina function.

   This finding underscores a surprising discovery made by the Human Genome
Project - that many genes in organisms as divergent as humans and flies have
remained unchanged over millions of years.

   More importantly, it means that scientists who want to study genetic
blindness in humans can work effectively and non-invasively in model systems
like fruit fly eyes.

   Tepass is hopeful that his work will lead to a treatment for retinitis
pigmentosa.

   "From your parents, you get the defective CRB1 gene," he said. "The question
is: how can you fix that gene?"

   One way is through gene therapy, a medical technique that replaces damaged,
mutated genes with healthy ones.

   Tepass said CRB1 is localized to a very specific kind of tissue, which should
facilitate gene therapy efforts.


LOAD-DATE: February 18, 2002


                              321 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2001 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                  Toronto Star

                    December 28, 2001 Friday Ontario Edition

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. 02

LENGTH: 968 words

HEADLINE: Top stories about issues, not medical advances

BYLINE: Judy Gerstel, Toronto Star

BODY:
Underlying most top health stories of 2001 is one big story: crumbling of
confidence in health care and services and the ability and commitment of the
political/medical complex to supply them.

   Advances this year in treating and diminishing disease have been incremental:
gene therapy research, including experimental gene therapy to reduce angina;
more effective drugs with fewer side effects; better control of symptoms;
greater understanding of the mechanism and dynamics that result in disease - for
example, drug-coated stents to prevent re-blockage of coronary arteries,
biologic drugs for rheumatoid arthritis, implantable left ventricular assist
devices and implantable artificial hearts.

   Here are the 10 most important health stories of 2001, selected by those of
us who write about health and medical matters, including reporters Vanessa Lu
and Prithi Yelaja, copy editor Margaret Calder and myself:

   1. Replacing ourselves

   Reproductive technology - including cloning human beings and using cells from
human embryos, bone marrow and umbilical cord blood to grow body tissue and
organs such as blood, heart valves and brain cells - was the year's biggest
story. Issues surrounding cloning, surrogate motherhood and using embryos for
research brought a new, high profile to the subject of bioethics.

   2. Anthrax and Cipro

   We joked about white powder but some Canadians thought they were under
attack. It was federal Health Minister Allan Rock who came to the rescue,
bypassing Bayer's patent and ordering emergency supplies of the antibiotic in
generic form. Bayer objected and negotiations took place to save face and money.
Outside Canada, Rock was admired for aggressively protecting Canadians but at
home he was mostly portrayed as over-reacting. Was anthrax anxiety a symptom of
the mass grief and depression that followed the 9/11 terrorist attack on this
continent?

   3. Breast screening confusion

   We'd been told that regular mammograms can reduce by 30 to 50 per cent the
risk of dying from breast cancer. This year, a Danish study reported in The
Lancet that mammography is not effective in preventing deaths and may mean that
patients undergo unnecessary mastectomies. Meanwhile, a Swedish radiologist
attending a conference on breast cancer here told The Star that post-menopausal
women should have a mammogram every two years while those between 40 and 50
should be screened annually because breast cancers in younger women tend to be
aggressive and fast-growing. And the Canadian Task Force on Preventive Health
Care recommended that women aged 40 to 69 should no longer be encouraged to do
breast self-exams because "there's no proof that it makes a difference."

   4. Private radiation clinics

   The after-hours private clinic at Sunnybrook treating early breast and
prostate cancer opened last February. Patients are pleased about not travelling
to the United States for treatment. But isn't there something fishy about the
former head of radiation oncology at Cancer Care Ontario starting a for-profit
company? Recently, the provincial auditor said the clinic hasn't made a dent in
waiting lists and isn't cheaper than public clinics. Also, the future of Cancer
Care Ontario is now in doubt, with the possibility of each hospital going it
alone.

   5. Paramedics

   Eighteen-month-old Methusam Vijayaratnam died from meningitis last February.
Paramedics had refused to take him to the hospital because they thought he had
an ear infection. His death provoked major concerns about the practices of
paramedics and the role of culture and sociology in interactions between the
medical system and people engaging with it. Also being questioned: ambulance
wait times.

   6. Home care

   The funding freeze and minimal availability of home care has provoked an
acute crisis in the lives of disabled and frail people living at home and their
caregivers. Of course, it's mostly the elderly and women who are affected, so
who cares? Can't or don't want to get into a nursing home? Can't afford private
care? Never mind that you contributed to the prosperity of this country. We
can't use you anymore. Too bad for you, suckers. You're on your own.

   7. Royal commission

   Saskatchewan's Roy Romanow started his inquiry last June and a draft report
is due in January, followed by public consultations. Can Romanow prescribe a
cure for the ailing system? He says everything will be examined, including
team-oriented care, user fees and more private, for-profit health care. Clearly,
he realizes how sick the patient really is.

   8. Medical secrets

   Star investigative reporters documented case after case of medical
carelessness, botched procedures and cover-ups. Patients are more knowledgeable
and the time when medical errors could be swept under the carpet by doctors
protecting doctors is long gone. Mistakes will always be made but they must be
acknowledged, not kept secret.

   9. Big pharma

   One of the world's biggest businesses is getting bigger. There is massive
drug advertising and promotion, with rewards for doctors, including luxury
travel and gourmet dining. A concern about influence on study results by
pharmaceutical companies - which underwrite most of the medical research
worldwide - led to prestigious medical journals stating editorially that no
research would be published without assurances that it was not tainted by drug
company interference or influence.

   10. Beyond the biomedical model

   The medical establishment's acceptance of alternative and complementary
medicine and of the psychosocial bases of disease could not have been predicted.
This year, the conservative Annals Of Internal Medicine devoted an issue to
alternative and complementary medicine. And the link between socio-economic
status and health is now a major area of research.


LOAD-DATE: December 28, 2001


                              328 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2001 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                  Toronto Star

                  September 27, 2001 Thursday Ontario Edition

SECTION: Pg. K08

LENGTH: 663 words

HEADLINE: Tamil women get grassroots aid in self-exam training

BYLINE: Brian Dexter, Toronto Star

HIGHLIGHT:
Grant one of many foundation gives to aid projects

BODY:
A group of 20 women from Toronto's Tamil community are being trained in breast
self-examination, thanks to a grant from the Canadian Breast Cancer Foundation.

   "They then go out and train other women," explains Jayanthie Reynold, a
program co-ordinator at the South Asian Women's Centre. "We have house meetings,
support groups for mammogram appointments and we have produced education
pamphlets in Tamil."

   The $10,000 grant to the South Asian centre was just one of dozens provided
each year by the Canadian Breast Cancer Foundation. Over the past 15 years, the
foundation has handed out more than $21 million to Ontario community groups and
researchers.

   The money goes to education projects aimed at supporting women living with
breast cancer and their families, as well as to special research and fellowships
to physicians.

   At the community level, projects ranged from education and self-examination
training in Toronto and Hamilton to a Sudbury-based breast screening shuttle
service.

   "We tend to help projects that increase access of women to education
services," says Marjie Cohn, director of communications for the foundation's
Ontario chapter. "The research we support has to be innovative and we are
probably shifting our focus towards environmental factors."

   Last year, the foundation's Ontario chapter handed out $2.5 million to fund
research, diagnosis, special projects and fellowships, and another $559,000 to
37 community education projects.

   In Sudbury, a $42,500 grant has allowed the Breast Cancer Screening program
of northeastern Ontario to purchase an 11-passenger van for a transportation
service.

   "The volunteer drivers are all men," says Sharon Bowes, a health promotions
co-ordinator. "Some trips are five hours or more from places like Chapleau."

   The transportation service to a screening clinic in Sudbury started in 1992
and the old van has now been retired with more than 220,000 kilometres on the
odometer.

   Another grant of $70,500 has gone to the De dwa da dehs nyes Aboriginal
Health Centre in Hamilton. It is a culturally based facility offering
traditional and Western health-care options to First Nations clients in Hamilton
and Brant County.

   Bruce Peterkin, a project director at the centre, says the money is going
towards development of an informative play about breast cancer awareness.

   "It will incorporate humour, facts and an emotional response from aboriginal
women who are hard to reach in the community," he says.

   "A videotape will also be produced and distributed to other aboriginal
agencies across Ontario."

   Peterkin says breast cancer occurs less often in aboriginal women than the
Canadian average for all women, but the mortality rate is higher.

   Other foundation grants in Toronto this year include $25,000 to Willow Breast
Cancer Support and Resource Services; $21,321 to St. Stephen's Community House,
which provides breast cancer prevention information in Portuguese, Cantonese and
Mandarin; and $6,154 to The Marvelle Koffler Breast Centre to produce a brochure
about breast cancer in men entitled "Men Can Get It, Too."

   Elsewhere in Ontario, a York Region health educator program to promote breast
screening among Chinese women received $15,757, the Weeneebayko Health
Association on James Bay got $13,155 to help teach breast self-examinations, and
the Thunder Bay Medical Centre $6,200 to assist physicians in identifying women
at high risk of breast cancer.

   On the research front, nearly $200,000 has been handed out to seven special
projects.

   In Toronto, Dr. Michelle Cotterchio of Cancer Care Ontario received $28,310
for a study related to hormonal factors, Dr. Donald Plewes of Sunnybrook and
Women's College Health Sciences Centre picked up $29,953 to probe improved MRI
for breast cancer screening, and Dr. Henry Klamut of the University Health
Network got $44,925 to look at breast cancer gene therapy.


LOAD-DATE: September 27, 2001


                              329 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2001 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                  Toronto Star

                   September 23, 2001 Sunday Ontario Edition

SECTION: ENTERTAINMENT; Pg. D12

LENGTH: 592 words

HEADLINE: Arrivals

BODY:
Canadiana, eh?

   John Robert Colombo has either written or edited some 130 books, most of
which mine Canadian facts and lore for fat volumes of Canadian quotations and
the like. But now Colombo may have faced the ultimate challenge: an attempt to
prove that beneath the dour Calvinist soul of this Arctic nation lurks a
rousing, ribald sense of humour. Sure, the out-of-proportion success of Canuck
comedians, television and script writers in the mighty U.S. is already
legendary. As the founder of National Lampoon, ex-Canadian Sean Kelly told us
once way back in the early '70s: "We can find the humour in almost anything
because we live next door to the U.S., the mightiest balloon of all, and we
learn early how to prick it for our amusement." In his introduction to The
Penguin Book Of Canadian Jokes (Penguin, 488 pages, $15.99), Colombo quotes
travel writer Jan Morris on the same theme: "The genius of Canada remains
essentially a deflationary genius ... It is part of the Canadian genius to
reduce the heroic to the banal." In these dark times, we could all use a dose of
genuine humour - although much if not most of Colombo's reportage is decidedly
of the groaner variety. From his section on chicken/road jokes: "Why does the
Canadian chicken cross the road? To get to the middle." Badda-boom!

   Knowlton Nash may have long given way to Peter Mansbridge as the tube's
breaking news leading man, but he's still a very busy guy, hosting the CBC
documentary series Witness, anchoring a news review series for schools and
libraries and writing books - now up to nine and counting. In The Swashbucklers:
The Story Of Canada's Battling Broadcasters (McClelland & Stewart, 322 pages,
$36.99), Nash ranges from the pioneers of the radio industry way back in the
post-World War I years to the Siftons and Bassetts and on to today's dominant
broadcast players: the Aspers of Winnipeg, Shaws of Calgary, Peladeaus of Quebec
and the Rogers, Slaights, Znaimers, Fecans and McQueens of Toronto. "Nowhere in
the world has the battle for broadcasting been fought with more ferocity, more
emotion and more guile than in Canada," Nash insists. Now that's world class,
eh?

   Vancouver science and technology writer William Illsey Atkinson hits the
TransCanada in pursuit of what he calls protohistory - how and why technology
evolved - in Prototype: How Canadian Innovation Is Shaping The Future (Thomas
Allen, 272 pages, $34.95). His thesis? Canada is a world leader in fostering
next-generation firms that enrich their investors but also fulfill employees and
protect the environment. Among his chosen firms' creative triumphs: an early
warning identifier for Alzheimer's; virus-free artificial chromosomes for human
gene therapy; computer models to identify the likely residence of serial
attackers; and new ways to modify and improve crops.

   The Toronto pair of Robin Mednick, who worked on the 2008 Olympic Bid
co-ordinating the athlete pitchpersons, and freelance writer Wendy Thomas have
collected and arm-twisted and in general beat the bushes for uplighting tales of
perseverance and the human spirit by 100 Canadian athletes of renown, including
some 77 Olympians and 13 Paralympians, ranging in age from 15 to 90 (runner Ray
Lewis on the '32 Los Angeles Olympics), in Heroes In Our Midst: Top Canadian
Athletes Share Personal Stories From Their Lives In Sport (McClelland & Stewart,
242 pages, $26.99), with a Wayne Gretzky forward. All royalties go to FAST, the
charitable Foundation for Athletes and Sports Training.


LOAD-DATE: September 23, 2001


                              334 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2001 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                  Toronto Star

                   September 6, 2001 Thursday Ontario Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A03

LENGTH: 234 words

HEADLINE: Breast cancer fight gets $4.5 million boost

BYLINE: Theresa Boyle, QUEEN'S PARK BUREAU

HIGHLIGHT:
Funds part of $20 million for health research

BODY:
The province is pouring $20 million into health research, with $4.5 million of
it earmarked for diagnosing and treating breast cancer.

   The money will help support research infrastructure and provide training
opportunities for health science researchers at five Toronto health
institutions, Energy, Science and Technology Minister Jim Wilson yesterday told
a news conference at the Sunnybrook and Women's College Health Sciences Centre.

   "Health sciences research is our most powerful weapon against
life-threatening illnesses such as cancer," he said.

   Sunnybrook's breast cancer research centre is getting $4.5 million to support
work being done to improve early detection, obtain more informative diagnoses
and improve surgical therapy.

   Sunnybrook is getting an additional $1.3 million to assist in a separate
project aimed at developing a data resource centre for health research.

   Also targeted for research funding is:

   The Hospital for Sick Children, which will receive $5.2 million to support
genetic research;

   The University Health Network, which will get $5 million for renovations and
new equipment for its Clinical Genomics Centre;

   The Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute, which is being given $1.9 million
for biorobotic research;

   St. Michael's Hospital, which will receive $1.7 million for a cardiovascular
gene therapy initiative.


LOAD-DATE: September 6, 2001


                              335 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2001 Sun Media Corporation
                      London Free Press (Ontario, Canada)

                     August 31, 2001 Friday, Final Edition

SECTION: Entertainment; Pg. C10

LENGTH: 568 words

HEADLINE: VIRUS MAKES MOUSE TUMOURS SELF-DESTRUCT

BYLINE: RICK CALLAHAN, AP

DATELINE: NEW YORK

BODY:

   Scientists have wiped out tumours in mice using a common virus that
apparently tricks cancer cells into self-destructing.

   It's too early to tell if the trickmight work in humans. Many treatments that
look promising in mice prove disappointing with people.

   However, the research sheds light on something scientists have noticed for
years: Some viruses harm cancer cells but leave normal, healthy cells unscathed.

   The study involves a virus thought harmless to humans and a gene called p53.
The gene normally suppresses tumours, but in most cancer patients it is
defective. The virus apparently zeroes in on that flaw.

   Peter Beard, virologist at the Swiss Institute for Experimental Cancer
Research in Epalinges, said the explanation involves an unusual hairpin-like
portion of the virus's DNA.

   When a cancer cell encounters the virus, it apparently interprets the hairpin
structure as damage to its own DNA. It tries to rid itself of the damage and
ends up self-destructing.

   The Swiss team injected human colon cancer cells into a group of lab mice,
followed by the virus two days later. Only two of the 12 rodents later formed
tumours.

   In mice with existing colon cancer tumours, injections of the virus
eliminated tumours in six of the 10 mice.

   The findings were reported in yesterday's issue of the journal Nature.

   Beard said his team hopes to find what exactly in the hairpin structure makes
cancer cells die. If they can do that, he said, they may be able to specially
engineer the virus or even devise a drug that mimics its effects.

   The virus tested is one of six known adeno-associated viruses, a group of
viruses that are among the smallest that exist. Some of those viruses have been
used many times by scientists for gene therapy, in which a virus delivers a
healthy copy of a gene to a patient.

   Cancer researcher Arnold J. Levine, co-discoverer of the p53 gene in 1979 and
president of Rockefeller University in New York, said the Swiss team's approach
is a long way off from ever being tried in humans.

   He said scientists pursuing therapies using viruses to target the p53 defect,
including gene therapy, all face the same problem: how to efficiently deliver
the therapy to every cancer cell in the body.

   One problem with adeno-associated viruses is that they can't reproduce
without another virus.

   Levine said the research's main contribution is explaining why certain
viruses can damage cancer cells while sparing normal cells.

   "What this paper does is actually explain for the first time why cancer cells
are preferentially knocked off by these viruses -- because they mimic DNA
damage," Levine said. "The cell apparently doesn't have the proper safeguards in
place and it dies."

   The p53 gene mutation that the virus exploits is present in nearly 60 per
cent of all human cancers. It is the same vulnerability that also makes cancer
cells prone to chemotherapy and radiation treatment, Beard said.

   Frank McCormick, a professor of microbiology and immunology at the University
of California at San Francisco, called the new research "very inventive."
McCormick helped develop ONYX-015, an engineered virus that has shown promise in
human clinical trials in destroying tumour cells with the mutated p53 gene.

   "The biggest question now is, can these viruses be grown in sufficient
quantity to make human clinical testing possible? That will be the next step,"
he said.

LOAD-DATE: August 31, 2001


                              344 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2001 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                  Toronto Star

                      July 16, 2001 Monday Ontario Edition

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. A12

LENGTH: 936 words

HEADLINE: Canadian policy angers New ZealandThe Dominion

BODY:
JUST DAYS after former prime minister Brian Mulroney was in New Zealand singing
the praises of a free trade deal with North America, the Canadian trade and
agriculture ministers were vowing sourly to resist a World Trade Organization
ruling that their government must stop subsidizing dairy exports.

   The contrast reveals what New Zealand is up against when the North American
economies are bent on solving their own agricultural problems at others'
expense.

   Mulroney described the free trade agreements he negotiated with the United
States as "like falling down a gold mine." He said two-way trade had soared, new
jobs had been created and fears that Canada's economic and cultural security
would be imperilled had proved groundless. He saw a potential circuit-breaker
for New Zealand if it were to join NAFTA.

   But there is a catch. NAFTA excludes the dairy sector. And when it comes to
dairy exports, the Canadian government is sticking doggedly to pricing policies
that distort international markets and put other traders at a severe
disadvantage.

   This has put it offside with the U.S. as well as New Zealand and the two
countries joined to challenge Canada's two-tier milk-pricing system through the
WTO.

   This week, for the third time in two years, a WTO panel found that the
system, which has one price for the domestic market and a lower one for exports,
amounts to an export subsidy and is therefore in breach of Canada's obligations.
Canada, however, is playing for time by appealing against the ruling.

   Members of the WTO are not at liberty to cherry-pick the clauses that suit
them and thumb their noses at the rest.

   New Straits Times

   Kuala Lumpur

   THE HAZE enveloping Malaysia reinforces the nagging perception that there is
no long-term regional policy on reducing forest fires and managing their
hazardous consequences on the ecosystem. At best, approaches have only involved
remedial action such as firefighting and water-bombing. The root of the problem
largely lies in the periodic forest fires in Sumatra and Kalimantan. But this is
an environmental problem that transcends borders. The recurrence of the haze
indicates that Indonesia has yet to institutionalize a strategy to combat the
problem.

   According to Indonesia's Forestry Minister, Marzuki Usman, the government has
no plans to fight the fires in its territory because it lacks the funds and the
human resources. It does not have a clear blueprint of how to cope with the
problem.

   The haze problem is a man-made disaster attributed to illegal land clearing
by local farmers and timber companies. What is particularly revealing is the
environment minister's statement that open burning is done again because the
perpetrators "are aware that the government has not been able to punish them."
Poor policing and weak enforcement can debilitate the efforts to curb the
slash-and-burn mode of land clearing. But with greater focus and commitment in
terms of funds and human resources, such administrative and legislative
weaknesses can be overcome.

   Los Angeles Times

   Los Angeles

   FEDERAL FUNDING for stem cell research is only a small piece of a much larger
set of issues: whether allowing human cloning to produce stem cells for research
is the first step toward the cloning of newborns; whether the possible benefits
of the new genetics justify the potential horrors; and whether we want to create
whole new biotech industries that depend on a ready supply of human embryos, to
be created, used and destroyed.

   Stem cells and cloning are only the beginning. The mapping of the human
genome raises the prospect of not just new genetic therapies for disease but
genetic enhancements, or so-called germ-line interventions, that would affect
future generations.

   In the end, an America that often flees hard choices will have to make a very
difficult one: between the new science, with its remarkable powers and
unforeseen dangers and the old faith or wisdom, with its humbling demands and
veil-shrouded mysteries. That we are unprepared is the understatement of the
pre-genetic age.

   Afternoon Despatch

   & Courier, Mumbai

   WHILE EVERYONE, including the media, appeared to have gone overboard in
hyping up Pakistan President Pervez Musharraf's visit to India, the President K.
R. Narayanan and his aides refused to be swayed by the excitement.

   Gently nudged by the mandarins of the ministry of external affairs to get
their act in place for the Musharraf visit, a senior aide of Narayanan responded
that they would accord "correct and proper" hospitality due to a visiting head
of state. What the aide did not add was that they wouldn't go overboard in
serenading Musharraf.

   Japan Times

   Tokyo

   JAPANESE HISTORY textbooks continue to draw angry reactions from South Korea
and China. Last week, the education ministry formally rejected almost all of the
revision requests from Seoul and Beijing, which claim that the textbooks distort
historical facts about Japan's militaristic past. The ministry admitted a couple
of errors concerning ancient Korean history. But it left intact about 40 items
on which revision had been requested all items relating to Japanese activities
before and during World War II.

   Wars waged by Japan are described in overly emotive terms that seem to give
them an aura of justification. Korean and Chinese requests for revision should
give a further impetus to the public debate on our own past. They need not be
taken as an "interference in domestic affairs."

   Japan still faces a test of sincerity in relations with its most important
Asian neighbours.Views From Abroad


LOAD-DATE: July 16, 2001


                              353 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2001 Sun Media Corporation
                      London Free Press (Ontario, Canada)

                      June 7, 2001 Thursday, Final Edition

SECTION: Lifestyle; Pg. C8

LENGTH: 469 words

HEADLINE: BREAKFAST FOR BETHANY

BYLINE: FREE PRESS STAFF

BODY:

   The words are hard to pronounce and the science no less difficult to
understand. But Londoners keep backing research into metachromatic
leukodystrophy.

   The latest event for the Bethany's Hope Foundation is the annual RCMP
Charitable Breakfast, held this year on June 15 in front of the RCMP O Division
headquarters.

   The foundation is named after Bethany McIntyre, who died at seven years old
from the disease that strips away children's normal development. The foundation
was created by her parents Dave and Lindey to fund research.

   "When you get into these enzyme replacement therapies and gene therapies and
enzyme abatement, it can get pretty deep for lay people like ourselves," says
Dave McIntyre.

   "We just keep our heads down and bring in money so they can move ahead with
their research. Five years ago, there was none in this area and now there are
two PhDs and technicians and they've hired two summer students."

   At the Bethany's Hope Leukodystrophy Laboratory at CPRI, Dr. Tony Rupar says
the money comes at the right time because scientific developments allow for more
productive research in this area.

   Noting how the city has rallied around causes like Bethany's Hope and Jesse's
Journey, Rupar says, "It's a reflection of London . . . It's a real statement
about the caring nature of people in London."
   IF YOU GO
   What: RCMP charitable breakfast
   When: June 15, 7:30-11 a.m.
 Where: Dufferin Corporate Centre, 130 Dufferin Ave. (Talbot Centre if it rains)

   Tickets: Minimum $3 donation requested. Available at RCMP headquarters, 130
Dufferin Ave., fifth floor
   FUND-RAISER ROUNDUP
 - Tomorrow and Saturday: These are the first dates of the Canadian Cancer
Society's Relays for Life in this area. Teams of 10 or more are sponsored by the
laps of a track they complete overnight. The first lap is a Survivors' Victory
Lap at 7 p.m. open to all survivors, whether they're on a team or not. Tomorrow
and Saturday, relays will be in Stratford and Strathroy. For more information
call (519) 271-4270 for Stratford; 432-1137 for Strathroy.

   - June 15 and 16: The relay will be in St. Thomas (register at 432-1137).

   - On June 22-23: It will be in Woodstock (register at 537-5592).

   - Sunday: Participation House Foundation, which supports severely disabled
people in the community, holds a bowl-a-thon at Fleetway Bowling Centre from
2p.m. to 6 p.m. The Independent Order of Foresters will match every dollar
raised with a 50-cent donation. To register, call 660-6635, ext. 235.

   - June 14: Author and playwright Timothy Findley supports the Friends of the
Stratford Public Library at a book signing and social at Knox Presbyterian
Church, 142 Ontario St., 7:15 p.m. Tickets are $12 or $10 for seniors and
students, from the library and some book stores.

GRAPHIC: photo; Tony Rupar believes ongoing support for Bethany's Hope reflects
the caring nature of the community.

LOAD-DATE: June 7, 2001


                              356 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2001 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                       May 16, 2001, Wednesday, Edition 1

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 394 words

HEADLINE: MOUTHWASH ATTACKS PRE-CANCEROUS LESIONS

BODY:



    SAN FRANCISCO (AP) - A gene-therapy mouthwash shows promise in warding off
oral cancer by destroying ominous growths before they turn malignant.

    The idea is to attack pre-malignant patches by unleashing viruses programmed
to kill cells that contain cancer-causing genes.

    The first study of this approach is under way but doctors said yesterday it
appears to work in at least some patients, making ominous patches in their
mouths disappear completely.

    In the past two decades, scientists have learned cancer arises from genetic
defects, often a half-dozen or more, that accumulate over a lifetime, causing
cancerous cells to grow rampantly and spread through the body.

    With this insight came the belief that it might be possible to target these
bad genes to stop cancer.

    One of the biggest roadblocks was reaching and killing every cancer cell,
when tumours are buried deep within organs or spread widely.

    The mouth seemed a good place to start such gene therapy. Dr. Ezra Cohen, of
the University of Chicago, reported the results on 10 patients to an American
Society of Clinical Oncology meeting in San Francisco.

    "The advantage is that it's where we can see it," Cohen said. "We can get to
it and the therapy does not get absorbed into the body."

    White or red patches in the mouth, so-called dysplastic lesions, frequently
are a forerunner of malignancy. They are common in smokers and heavy drinkers.

    These cells typically contain mutant genes. One of the most common,
occurring in about half, is a broken p53 gene. This is a tumour-supressor gene.
It ordinarily kills cells that contain dangerous mutations. Without a working
copy of this gene, the mouth growths can go on to become cancerous.

    Cohen and colleagues at M.D. Anderson Cancer Center in Houston and the
University of California at San Francisco tested a gene-therapy mouthwash
developed by Onyx Pharmaceuticals, which financed the study.

    The treatment consists of a gene-crippled adenovirus, which scientists
theorize can infect damaged p53 genes to kill precancerous cells.

    Doctors are giving patients the flavourless mouthwash once a week for 12
weeks. Those who respond get another 12 weeks of treatment.

    So far, patches have disappeared completely in two of the 10 mouths treated
and partly cleared in two others.


LOAD-DATE: May 16, 2001


                              361 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2001 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                      April 21, 2001, Saturday, Edition 1

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 1556 words

HEADLINE: INTO THE FUTURE INSIDE CANADA'S GENETIC HEARTLAND

BODY:





    are cracking

    nature's code

    UNLOCKING THE SECRETS OF LIFE

    profiled at birth and everything's predetermined for them.'


    FUTURE: Toronto General Hospital research technician

    Monique Albert gingerly adds fluorescent dye to genetic samples, preparing
them for study. The samples will be subjected to a laser scanner, and
computerized analysis, to highlight active genes.

    PHOTOGRAPHY BY JIM RANKIN/TORONTO STAR


    The DNA molecule at the core of our cells resembles a ladder,
 twisted into a spiral, with hundreds of thousands of rungs. The
 rungs are made of four basic chemicals, arranged in pairs:
 adenine, thymine, guanine and cytosine. Forming long chains,
 these chemicals act as letters on a page spelling out complex
 sentences - humanity's genetic code. Working together, the
 sentences provide exquisitely precise instructions, telling every
 cell in our body what job to do, when to multiply, and when to
 die.




    Leslie Papp Glass slides are the keys to our genetic kingdom, each smaller
 than a business card and crusted with 32,000 specks - all dots of
 DNA.

    Made with a precision beyond human hands, they're the work of a robot. And,
like it or not, they'll soon be a basic part of health care. Most of us can
expect a "biochip" in our future, laying bare our unique genetic structure for
easy analysis.

    Going by various names - Gene Chip, biochip, a microarray - these slides
offer dramatic new perspectives on hidden codes driving our cells.

    Thousands of such chips have already been made, just on University Ave. And
many thousands more are produced daily in labs around the world.

    "It's taking off," says Neil Winegarden, a manager at the University Health
Network's microarray centre, in Toronto.

    "This is going to be common," he says, spreading his arms for emphasis.
"Just about everybody will be doing some microarray screening."

    The microarray centre is located in Canada's genetic science heartland - an
area contained within a four-block radius drawn from the intersection of
University Ave. and College St. Inside that circle stand the University of
Toronto, five of the country's leading research hospitals, and a host of upstart
biotech firms.

    This heartland contains a renowned "library" of more than 5 million frozen
gene samples, the world's foremost computerized gene database, and an army of
researchers performing genetic experiments on a daily basis.

    Some work with mice, since these rodents have many genes in common with us.
Others work with human tissue. All, one way or another, are striving to unlock
jumbled secrets hidden within humanity's genetic code. Microarrays are
fast-becoming essential tools in their quest.

    The easiest route to the University Health Network's microarray centre is
through Toronto General Hospital's antique College St. entrance. Doric columns
frame the doorway, but a scientific revolution brews just inside.

    With a zip and a hum, a robot is busy printing up chips. Shielded from the
outside world by a plexiglass case, it's just a mechanical arm, but one capable
of combining exquisite precision with mindless repetition.

    Instead of fingers, it bristles with 48 hollow pins. Arrayed in rows, they
descend on a slide and deposit minuscule droplets of salt water in which gene
fragments are suspended. Swinging to a plastic tray, with 384 tiny wells, the
pins are dipped to suck up more genetic material, like 48 tiny fountain pens.
Then the arm moves to another chip to print again. Up to 60 can be done in one
batch.

    "It will print on them all, 48 spots at a time," says Winegarden. "Then we
clean off the pins, pick the next 48 samples, and go around and print again."

    When a droplet evaporates, it leaves behind a genetic fragment. Printing
continues until each slide is crusted with up to 32,000 fragments and the DNA
fixed into place with a coating of special chemicals.

    The centre's two robots grind out 500 chips a week but production will jump
to 1,000 when another two robots arrive this month, says Winegarden.

    A common experiment with finished biochips involves a basic comparison,
using laser scanners and computers. In some labs, for example, slides from women
with breast cancer are being compared to chips from cancer-free women, with
researchers hoping to find subtle genetic changes responsible for tumours.

    "You look for differences," says Winegarden. When done many times, perhaps
with slides from 1,000 women with cancer, "you find which genes are constantly
changed - then you know which are involved in the disease."

    Once rogue genes have been identified, a test can be developed searching for
these markers, warning people of looming cancer before tumours even appear. And
genes could become targets for drug development, with researchers seeking ways
to block their action.

    Microarray screening also has the power to predict which medicines work best
in a patient - and which to avoid - since genetic variations affect the
usefulness of many drugs.

    Peter Ray, head of molecular diagnostics at the Hospital for Sick Children,
foresees a time when blood samples will routinely be analyzed for genes
controlling our reaction to common drugs. Then, before a family doctor
prescribes a medicine, a check could be made to see how well it would work.

    "This is going to be a tool to help guide therapy," says Winegarden, but it
won't happen overnight.

    "We're still a long way from knowing what all our genes are doing," he says.
" So, right now, we're at the basic research stage."

    In another part of sprawling Toronto General Hospital, Dr. Shaf Keshavjee
watches a lung transplant done on a white rat. An incision splits the animal's
left side and, through it, a tiny pink lung puffs and shrinks to a rhythm of a
ventilator.

    With rock-steady hands, Dr. Mark de Perrot, a visiting surgeon from
Switzerland, cuts free the lung and installs a new one, deftly connecting its
string-thin blood vessels and windpipe.

    Chalk white, and the size of a kidney bean, the new organ puffs up to triple
its size and quickly turns pink when filled with air. The rat will use this new
lung for two hours, explains Keshavjee, director of the Ontario lung transplant
program. Then the organ will be removed and analyzed for subtle changes
resulting from the operation.

    Keshavjee's lab is exploring how genes respond to transplant trauma. Lungs
are particularly delicate. Only one in five organ donors experiencing brain
death produces a usable lung.

    It's known that genes govern the processes of inflammation and cell death.
So finding those genes, and blocking their work, could save lives by preserving
more lungs for transplant.

    "What we're saying is, 'Let's insert another gene that will allow the lung
to deal with injury when it comes,' " Keshavjee says.

    Biochips are used to study human lung tissue and also to compare rat lungs,
before and after transplant, to see how genes respond to the operation.
Experimental treatments have already begun, using a specially engineered virus
to deliver the IL-10 gene to rat lungs. This gene dampens inflammation after an
injury.

    "It puts out the fire," Keshavjee says, noting that transplant damage was
significantly reduced in test rats receiving the gene therapy. Researchers plan
to try it in pigs and, if all goes well, in humans.

    "The excitement of this work is that it doesn't only apply to lung
transplants - it applies to every transplant," Keshavjee says.

    On another floor of the hospital, cardiologist Dr. Peter Liu uses microarray
technology to study genes promoting heart failure.

    About 500,000 Canadians are living with this slow destruction of the heart,
and many don't even know it. That number is expected to double over the next 10
years.

    The condition is caused by damage from a heart attack, a viral infection, or
inherited weakness. But it's not known precisely how these factors do their
harm.

    "What sets the stage? What triggers the entire process? What actually goes
wrong?" Liu asks, leaning forward with his eyes wide. "This is where the
microarray comes in. The goal is to identify particular genes driving the
process."

    Knowing those genes, "we'll be able to target treatment and prevention more
intelligently."

    But the detailed genetic data printed on a biochip may also have darker
uses.

    "Visions of sci-fi movies come into our head," Winegarden says, tapping his
forehead lightly with his fingertips, "where people are profiled at birth and
everything's predetermined for them.

    "I should probably watch what I say," he adds, with a nervous chuckle. "But,
to be honest, if you put the wrong tool in the wrong person's hands, there's
always a chance it will be used inappropriately."

    It's up to governments to set strict rules on how genetic data is to be
used, and who should have access to the vast amount of intensely private
information that can be packed on to a biochip, Winegarden says.

    The job of researchers is to expand knowledge, not set regulations, he adds,
shrugging his shoulders. "To a large extent, it's out of the hands of people
like us.

    "But, in today's age, it's not an ignorant society any more. People know
these things are out there. Hopefully they'll speak up and protect themselves. "


GRAPHIC: Two scientific teams finished transcribing humanity's genetic code
earlier this year, giving us a detailed owner's manual for the human body.
Writing down that code is considered among the greatest breakthroughs in the
history of science. But . . . . . . researchers don't know what most of the code
actually means. It must still be deciphered. The next great goal of science is
to figure out how our 30,000 genes work together to make a human being. And
Toronto experts are at the forefront of that quest. UP CLOSE:
 Mark de Perrot, above, a visiting Swiss doctor, performs a lung transplant on a
test rat. The implanted organ will later be removed and analyzed for subtle
changes. Doctors hope the research will uncover ways to preserve human lungs for
transplant. At left, Toronto General scientist Sara Arab examines cell
containers holding a virus that attacks the heart and damages genes. ROBOTIC
PRECISION:
 The 48 hollow pins of the microarray robot at Toronto General act as miniature
fountain pens collecting and depositing tiny droplets containing gene fragments.
Up to 32,000 of these droplets can be placed on a glass slide smaller than a
business card. Then the DNA is fixed into place with a coating of special
chemicals. A batch of 60 slides can be done at once.

LOAD-DATE: April 21, 2001


                              363 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2001 Sun Media Corporation
                      London Free Press (Ontario, Canada)

                     April 12, 2001 Thursday, Final Edition

SECTION: The Progress Edition; Pg. U3

LENGTH: 590 words

HEADLINE: ALL EYES ARE ON LONDON;
THE LONDON CENTRE WILL BE THE LARGEST OF ITS KIND

BYLINE: MARY-JANE EGAN, FREE PRESS HEALTH REPORTER

BODY:

   Imagine repairing a heart defect on the world's tiniest patient -- still in
the womb.

   Imagine a heart bypass patient discharged within 24 hours and back on the job
in a week.

   And picture a surgeon in Sarnia, stymied by something he's never encountered
before, dialling up a London specialist who sees the same videoscopic image and
offers advice.

   All three scenarios will move closer to reality within 18 months when London
becomes home to a health facility unique in the world.

   The National Centre for Advanced Surgery in Robotics will be the largest
facility of its kind dedicated to the clinical application of robotics.

   The $25-million centre, to take shape at the University campus of the London
Health Sciences Centre, has received $10 million in government funding; private,
industry and institutional support is to cover the rest of the cost.

   The five-storey, 30,000-square-foot centre will house an estimated 300
researchers within five years, said Doug Boyd, the London cardiac surgeon who
two years ago performed the world's first cardiac bypass on a beating heart,
using robotics.

   Already, all eyes are on London as the premier training site for the study of
a skill that promises to revolutionize surgery, Boyd says.

   Since that first procedure, in which Zeus the robot responded to Boyd's voice
commands to perform heart bypass surgery on a Seaforth farmer without having to
crack the chest and stop the heart, 56 such procedures have been performed on
patients from every province, Boyd says.

   Hospital discharge and recovery time are cut in half with less invasive
robotic surgery.
   But that's just the beginning.
 Boyd says the new centre will provide robotic training in all surgical
disciplines, opening the door to "telementoring," in which a surgeon in one
location can benefit from the expertise and advice of a more seasoned
specialist.

   Ultimately, the technology paves the way for surgery behind enemy lines in a
war zone or even in outer space, with a surgeon controlling the robot's moves.

   A robotic fetal surgery program is also planned for the centre, permitting
both surgery and gene therapy to be performed on the unborn.

   Boyd -- who has received e-mail from around the globe from surgeons keen to
train in robotics in London -- said while beating-heart robotic surgery has
clear benefits over conventional bypasses, some patients will still require
traditional heart surgery, based on anatomical and physiological criteria.

   But Boyd suspects half of all bypass patients are suited for robotic surgery
-- underscoring the need to train surgeons in the skill. Several studies have
supported London's own research that suggests use of the heart-lung machine in
conventional bypasses has been linked to neuropsychological deficits in the
patient.

   As associate professor in the faculty of medicine at the University of
Western Ontario, Boyd says medical residents will study robotics as part of
their regular training.

   There are currently only three other prototypes in the world like London's
Zeus robot. The others are in Europe and the U.S.

   Boyd notes London's prototype is based on a design developed by NASA and the
aerospace industry. The only competing system was developed by the U.S. Defence
Department.

   While he concedes he has an obvious bias, Boyd says in terms of size and
efficiency, the space design is superior.

   "The one designed for the military is more bulky and dextrous," he says.
"It's more like a centurion tank versus a streamlined, hand-held laser."

GRAPHIC: photo by Susan Bradnam, The London Free Press; Surgeons watch a monitor
as they perform a robot-assisted cardiac bypass. The operation is less invasive
than conventional bypass surgery.

LOAD-DATE: April 13, 2001


                              374 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2001 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                     February 17, 2001, Saturday, Edition 1

SECTION: SPECIALS

LENGTH: 1135 words

HEADLINE: INVESTING IN THE SEARCH FOR CURES FUND FILE

BYLINE: Diana Cawfield

BODY:

    hopes his fund will yield


    While technology stocks have lost their irrational exuberance, and recession
rumours have replaced dot.com conversations, a new if also risky opportunity is
emerging from cutting-edge medical laboratories across Canada.

    Biotechnology - a potent coupling of medical science and state-of-the-art
technology - has been a hot area within the health sciences for the past two
years. Start-up medical research companies that have benefited from a recent
surge in labour-sponsored, venture-capital dollars, and renewed government
support, are now coming to fruition.

    New drug breakthroughs and genomics - the exotic study of genes - is
creating a stir in the medical community that experts predict will revolutionize
the biotech industry over the next 10 to 20 years. Effective designer drugs,
with low toxicity, are poised to change the way we tackle cancer and heart
disease, and giant strides in gene therapy will shape future diagnosis and
treatment of disease.

    Dr. Calvin Stiller, organ-transplant pioneer, entrepreneur, and savvy
investor, is starting to see the benefits of funding and investor confidence, as
chairman and CEO of London-based Canadian Medical Discoveries Fund Inc. He
co-manages the fund with MDS Capital Corp. in Toronto, where he commutes about
two days a week. Canadian Medical has seen a one year return of over 25 per cent
ending December 30, 2000, compared to the industry average of 10 per cent, and a
respectable fourth ranking among 24 labour-sponsored funds in Canada. According
to Stiller, we're on the cusp of a new frontier, as transformational as the
Internet.

    A hands-on example of one of the innovative companies supported by Canadian
Medical is Nexia Biotechnologies Inc., a Quebec-based company that raised $40
million when it went public. The founder, Dr. Jeffrey Turner, out of McGill
University, fused the mammary cell of a dwarf African goat with a spider silk
gene, producing spider-silk protein in the goat's milk. He then cloned the goat,
producing Canada's first transgenic dairy animal, named Willow, in 1998.

    Proteins extracted from the goat milk are spun into filaments, producing
BioSteel - the strongest and lightest-weight material known to man. The product
has the capacity to be used all the way from medical sutures - stitches to close
wounds - to airplanes to automobile manufacturing to bullet- roof vests.

    Stiller now has a herd of these highly-active little goats romping around,
but it will be another couple of years before this fantastical product comes to
market.

    Patience is a virtue when it comes to labour-sponsored funds. While
investors can benefit from generous tax credits, there is an eight-year minimum
holding period. The combined federal and provincial tax sweetener of 30 per cent
- popular during RRSP season - and a recent additional 5 per cent Ontario tax
credit for Canadian Medical become a bitter pill to swallow if you redeem early.

    Canadian Medical, now climbing the upswing of the "hockey-stick" investment
curve, is a good example of the birth, and significant growing pains, of a
labour-sponsored fund.

    Let's backtrack to inception. In 1995 Stiller got a phone call that changed
his career path. He was a professor of medicine at the University of Western
Ontario, a position that he still maintains.

    While Stiller had been very successful with personal business ventures, he
swore, "I would never invest somebody else's dollar and I laid awake at night. "
But the caller convinced Stiller that "they had to do something in the life
sciences" and he crossed the line. "I said I would go from the bedside to the
boardrooms," says Stiller, "but my interest was really still in the area of
bench to bedside, discovery, and application of cures for mankind."

    So the investment community became his clinic. Along with a team of 26
professionals and "smart capital," Stiller raised $14.7 million in 1995,
creating the Canadian Medical Discoveries Fund.

    'I said I would go from the bedside to the boardrooms but my interest was
really still in the area of bench to bedside - discovery, and application of
cures for mankind.'

    Characteristic of venture-capital investments, the fund was a slow starter
and volatile. It returned 3.7 per cent in 1996, 1.2 per cent in 1997, lost
almost 10 per cent in 1998, then just squeaked above the plus side in 1999 with
a .4 per cent return. Yet, despite the volatility, 80,000 Canadians have
invested in the fund to date, boosting assets under management to over $335
million.

    Labour-sponsored investments are not for the squeamish. And they're
expensive.  The management-expense ratio for Canadian Medical is currently at
4.80 per cent. But Stiller defends the high fees as justifiable because of the
intense research and time spent managing the portfolio.

    Great efforts are made to offset risk through diversification. Over 45
companies make up the fund, with a third of the investments in public companies
and the balance in private companies. Currently, a third of the portfolio is
held in cash to reduce market volatility and to take advantage of buying
opportunities.

    While long-term gains can be enormous - 100 to 200 per cent returns are
feasible - says Stiller, "it takes five to eight years of every single
investment to be tested, and, the average investment right now is only 34 months
old."

    Despite the risky nature of venture companies, the quiet-spoken, 60-year old
physician, "who no longer writes prescriptions," brings a wealth of medical
achievements and industry clout to the portfolio.

    In 1995, he received the Order of Canada, and in 2000 received the Order of
Ontario, for his contributions to transplantation innovation. (Stiller
established a multi-organ transplant unit in London, Ont. and served as unit
chief from 1984 to 1996) In 1998, Stiller was granted $750 million in research
and development funds by the premier of Ontario to develop alliances between
business and research institutions over the next ten years.

    So the son of a Saskatchewan Pentecostal minister, who can't remember not
wanting to be a doctor, has found a new mission. "The strength of the fund - the
industry - is dependent upon our bright, young people having a place to carry
out their research, with a sense of optimism of the future. The government and
public commitment in investment research and education is absolutely vital. But
we can't afford to let down for a second. It's an international competitive
game. That's what drives me. That's my passion."

    File is a monthly feature about people and issues in the world of mutual
funds. Send comments to business@thestar.ca, or write the mutual funds editor at
The Toronto Star, Business, 5th floor newsroom, Toronto, ON M5E 1E6.



GRAPHIC: LANA SLEZIC/TORONTO STAR
 HAS PATIENCE:
 There is great potential but returns won't be instant, says Dr. Calvin Stiller
about the Canadian Medical Discoveries Fund, which he chairs. "The strength of
the fund . . . is dependent upon our bright, young people having a place to
carry out their research."

LOAD-DATE: February 17, 2001


                              377 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2001 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                      February 12, 2001, Monday, Edition 1

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 1172 words

HEADLINE: SCIENTISTS PORE OVER 'BOOK OF LIFE' SECRETS

BYLINE: Tanya Talaga

BODY:



    genetic revolution

    'It is clear that what is called 'race,' although culturally
 important, reflects just a few traits determined by a tiny
 fraction of our genes.'


    Mapping the human genome - the owner's manual of the human race -
 has opened a new era for medical science and a new frontier for
 potential discrimination.

    Today, at a Washington press conference that will be beamed around the world
live via the Internet, the consortium of scientists deciphering the human
genetic code, will detail their work thus far.

    One of their most fascinating findings is how similar humans are to each
other. With 99.9 per cent of all people sharing the same genes, ethnicity based
on race is largely a social fabrication.

    "It is clear that what is called 'race,' although culturally important,
reflects just a few traits determined by a tiny fraction of our genes," said
Svante Paabo, the author of a paper in Science.

    Among their other findings:

    The creation of designer drugs, tailor made to each person's individual
illness could one day be common place instead of the current one-size-fits- all
pharmaceuticals.

    The genetic revolution will help create better treatments for drug and
alcohol addictions.

    Finding genes that influence behaviour could lead to drugs that can help
prevent some major societal problems. Figuring out the human genome will improve
our ability to identify the genetic risk factor genes for a whole variety of
conditions, from addiction to criminality to anti-social personality.

    Only 30,000 genes - not 100,000 as it was previously thought - define the
human race. We share many of the same genes as fruit flies or worms.

    The report is the first comprehensive analysis of the human genetic code and
science has only just begun to understand the genome, said Dr. Lap-Chee Tsui,
geneticist-in-chief at The Hospital For Sick Children in Toronto.

    "This is really the first analysis," he said yesterday. "At this stage, it
still won't mean much to the general public, but, it's academic value is
historical."

    Sick Kids hospital houses the Human Genome Database, the official central
data bank for the U.S.-led human genome project.

    This week, the journal Nature is publishing the work of the public
scientists led by Dr. Francis Collins, director of the U.S. National Human
Genome Research Institute. The journal Science is publishing the sequence by
Celera Genomics, the Rockville, Md., company led by Dr. Craig Venter. There are
40 scientific reports on this initial interpretation of the entire code - known
as the genome.

    Genes hold the instruction set our cells use to create life. They are made
of DNA, molecules encoded with information recorded in a chemical alphabet of
four letters - A,C,T and G. Spelling mistakes in the genes can result in
disease.

    Genetic mutations are thought to be behind 1,500 diseases, from diabetes to
some cancers and heart disease.

    Having an owner's manual of life is expected to promote medical advances
such as improved diagnostic tests and designer drugs that can target an
individual's genetic variations.

    It may soon be possible for medical science to pinpoint in each patient the
genes that have gone awry, said Barbara Trask of the U.S. Hutchinson Cancer
Centre.

    One day babies could get a detailed genetic breakdown of which disease they
are most likely to develop in their lifetime, and, what to do to try to prevent
them.

    With the genome map, Trask said, medical science will be able to find
answers about other diseases, such as why some people contracting a virus, such
as HIV, rapidly become sick, while others don't.

    "Why do cancer cells in some people progress and in others they do not?" she
said. "Having the complete genome will help us figure all this out."

    Mapping the genome may unlock some secrets of science, but it could also
usher in a new era of discrimination.

    The news will, no doubt, rekindle debate over who needs to know, or, who
gets to see our personal genetic information. And, how we as a human race will
handle the knowledge.

    The threat of discrimination looms if policies are not created to protect
the individual.

    Employers and insurance companies could save millions of dollars if they
could use genetics to pick out and reject workers or policy applicants who are
likely to develop disease.

    Experts fear genetic discrimination may be added to the list of other forms
of discrimination: racial, ethnic, age and sexual.

    Without safeguards, write Republican Senator Vermont James Jeffords and
Democratic Senator Tom Daschle in the current special Human Genome edition of
Science, "the genetic revolution could mean one step forward for science and two
steps backwards for civil rights.

    "Misues of genetic information could create a new underclass: the
genetically less fortunate," they say.

    "It is estimated that all of us carry dozens of glitches in our DNA - so
establishing principles of fair use of this information is important for us
all," said Collins.

    People from different races may be strikingly similar - variations among
people represent 0.01 per cent. But regardless, some experts believe the
wealthy, developed nations will far benefit from genetic knowledge than those in
the developing world.

    Effective gene therapy may still be far in the future, but, richer countries
will benefit from the advances first, said Dr. Bernadette Modell, professor of
community genetics at the Royal Free and University College London Medical
School.

    "It will not be very relevant for most developing countries for a long
time," she said. "We need to focus on developing DNA methods that are really
cheap and simple, and avoid overloading by patenting."

    One of the most provocative genome discoveries is the possibility that
humans may be made up of only 30,000 protein-coding genes - a far cry smaller
number than the 100,000 genes they predicted we owned just last year. And, it
means people only have 13,000 more genes than the common fruit fly.

    This knowledge will undoubtedly trigger a bounty of philosophical, ethical
and religious questions throughout the beginning of this new century, writes
Jean-Michel Claverie, of France's Structural & Genetic Information Laboratory,
in Science.

    "That a mere one-third increase in gene numbers could be enough to progress
from a rather unsophisticated nematode (with about 20,000 genes) to humans is
certainly quite provocative," he writes. A nematode is a multicellular,
parasitic animal, like roundworm.

    But, even if the number of genes humans possess are only twice as many as a
worm, or a fly, said Tsui, the complexity "would be so much more", he said.

    Each gene is like a musical instrument, Tsui explained. If there are 30,000
musical instruments in the human orchestra, what could separate humans from the
rest of life just might be the sophisticated music our orchestra can play.

    With files from Knight Ridder Newspapers and Associated Press


GRAPHIC: RAPHAEL GAILLARDE/NEWSMAKER PHOTOS
 PRIVATE LAB:
 At Celera Genomics Inc. in Rockville, Md., where scientists mapped the human
genome, colonies of E. coli bacteria are cloned before their DNA is sequenced.
KRT FILE PHOTO
 DR. FRANCIS COLLINS:
 Bethesda, Md., scientist isolated the first human gene.

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 2001


                              381 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2001 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                      January 26, 2001, Friday, Edition 1

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 554 words

HEADLINE: A FEW SUGGESTIONS, MR. PREMIER

BODY:



    It's time to dream again, the premier says.

    Time to crank up a "visioning initiative" - an "extensive consultation
exercise" for the Mike Harris "Ontario PC Party."

    Some people are dubious about this. Liberal Leader Dalton McGuinty says it's
" all sizzle, no steak." NDP Leader Howard Hampton said it's "fluff." The Star's
Ian Urquhart called it "vapid and redundant."

    Certainly, there's not much in what Harris said. The few suggestions that he
did put forward were not comforting.

    "I have people coming up to me and saying you don't need any Sick Kids
hospital any more. Kids won't be sick. We'll have that fixed before they're
born" he said, musing about new drugs and gene therapy.

    A touch scary, that thinking.

    Troubling, too, are the people he's got running this visioning exercise -
Education Minister Janet Ecker, who seems determined not to solve the school
crisis she created, and Marilyn Mushinski, best known for her judge bashing.

    But let us put that all that aside and take the premier at his word. The
premier says he wants ideas.

    And just because he says the "visioning initiative" is for party members
doesn't mean the public can't join in. In that spirit, we have some suggestions
for the premier:

    Drop the Sick Kids idea. Kids fall and hurt themselves. They get bugs from
adults and other kids. They need specialized care.

    Change your priority to people. There are lots of ways to do this.

    Economist Tom Courchene says your "mission statement" for Ontario has "
impressive rhetoric" on quality education and training but you have "yet to
deliver on this human capital agenda."

    Who will teach in the $1.8 billion in new buildings on university and
college campuses?

    Who will heal in the $1 billion in new hospitals?

    Do what you promised to the health system. Reform it so it's no longer so
centred on hospitals.

    Start with restoring the province's public health system.

    The job of public health is to keep 95 per cent of Ontarians not in
hospitals out of them. Fund it so it can do the job.

    The environment is a health issue, too. Treating laid-off water inspectors
as a saving is nonsense after Walkerton. Coal power is only cheaper if you don't
count heart attacks, kids with asthma attacks and clogged emergency wards.

    You need more doctors and nurses or primary care will never ease the load on
hospitals. And forget the idea of forcing doctors to go on salary - there's no
quicker way to propel older doctors into early retirement and new medical
graduates to the U.S.

    Give up on replacing doctors with nurse practitioners in the 109 communities
looking for 500 doctors. You've hit small-town Ontario hard enough, what with
closed schools and hospitals, downloaded social costs and water bills.

    Nurses? We already have the fewest per capita in the country. Unless you
compete on pay, working conditions, training and decent hours - not to mention
respect - we'll sink further.

    Home care, community care and long-term care? Same problem, too few nurses.

    There are other items for your vision. We have a housing crisis. The 60,000
units you promised if you got out of social housing haven't appeared. Start
building again.

    That will do for now. We'll have more as the visioning hits us. Meanwhile,
dream on, premier.


LOAD-DATE: January 26, 2001


                              392 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2001 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                       January 5, 2001, Friday, Edition 1

SECTION: LIFE

LENGTH: 660 words

HEADLINE: RECOGNIZING THE MIND AS THE INNER PHYSICIAN

BODY:



    Centuries ago, poor health, pain and disease were attributed to an imbalance
of the four humours: blood, phlegm, black and yellow bile. Before that, human
beings accepted illness as punishment from God for misdemeanours and hubris.

    In modern times, microscopic enemies - germs, bacteria and viruses - were
identified as the cause of disease. Most recently, the focus has been on genes
and the coding for disease that we bring with us into the world.

    But another way of thinking about illness and wellness may be as
revolutionary and transforming as the human genome project. It is the idea that
some of what ails us, we create - inside ourselves and surrounding us.

    We create it as individuals and as a society. Even more important, we may be
able to ameliorate it.

    This isn't about blaming the victim. It's as unconscionable to suggest that
people are responsible for their diseases as it is to suggest that their
suffering is a form of punishment. And who wouldn't choose to cure themselves,
if only it were that simple?

    What this is about is the mind-body connection that is being explored more
and more by medical scientists. Because while drugs and gene therapy may heal
some of what ails us, the inert placebo (literally, "I please") is arguably the
most powerful drug of all.

    Its power is that it works on the mind. The mind, in turn, works on the
body. The mind is the inner physician.

    "Placebos appear to reduce stress or blood pressure, and even shrink
tumours," notes a recent story in the London Sunday Times magazine about "the
mysterious healing magic of pretend drugs."

    Even placebo surgery - incisions without treatment - have positive effects
on patients.

    In the famous case of a Texas man who was suffering from an arthritic knee,
an incision was made and subsequently stitched up, but the arthroscopic surgery
was never performed. Nevertheless, the patient was pain-free post- operatively,
remained that way six months later, and was able to move with vigour. He
remained pain-free even when told the operation was a hoax.

    According to a prominent American surgeon, thousands of hysterectomies and
appendectomies are done every year as placebos - incisions only.

    The placebo effect is key to complementary or alternative medicine,
including the principle of the healing encounter between professional and
patient.

    In the U.S. now, complementary medical treatments form 42 per cent of all
therapies and the figure is expected to rise to 75 per cent by the end of the
decade. The august National Institutes of Health in Washington, D.C. has
established a National Centre for Complementary and Alternative Medicine. The
renowned U.S. centre for cancer treatment, New York's Memorial Sloan- Kettering,
which has pioneered rigorous scientific protocols, has also advertised massage
and Tibetan bells as part of its cancer therapy.

    And in an exploratory study conducted by Alastair Cunningham of the Ontario
Cancer Institute/Princess Margaret Hospital, reported in the current issue of
the journal Advances in Mind-Body Medicine, "a significant relationship was
found between degree of involvement in psychological work and survival duration"
among 22 Toronto patients with incurable cancer. On average, they lived twice as
long as expected.

    The same journal refers to a study in which people with psoriasis who
meditated while receiving ultraviolet light therapy healed at approximately four
times the rate of people who were just getting the ultraviolet light.

    "Gaining a deeper insight into the self-healing properties of human beings
could well become the holy grail of medicine in the coming century," concludes
the London magazine.

    It may be that while attention is focussed on the genome project, the
science of psychoneuroimmunology - the connection between mind and body - will
bring us closest to understanding and healing illness - and ourselves.

    jgerste@thestar.ca.


LOAD-DATE: January 5, 2001


                              395 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2001 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                       January 1, 2001, Monday, Edition 1

SECTION: SPORTS

LENGTH: 1304 words

HEADLINE: FUTURE SHOCK

BYLINE: Garth Woolsey

BODY:



    in the wacky world of sports

    world of sports

    Fair and Foul was out surfing the Internet the other day and got
 caught by one of those cyber waves, like in A Perfect Storm. Took
 us on a wild ride into the future of sports before spitting us up
 back here, feeling somewhat hung over, on the shores of the
 contaminated Toronto port lands, proposed site of the Olympic
 Games.

    (And, no, we do not win the bid. Beijing prevails.)

    So, what's out there? More of the same. Lots of it. But some surprises, too.

    Like Dan Quisenberry, the late, great submariner with the Kansas City
Royals, once said: "I have seen the future and it's much like the present - only
longer."

    Plus, when it comes to sports, there is faster, higher, etc., as well as
longer. What did you expect, anyway? That athletes were going to get smaller,
slower, weaker . . . more humble, lower paid? Records, as they say, are made to
be broken.

    In the waning days of '00 there were ominous warnings from informed experts
about the next wave of cheating - beyond drugs and into genetic engineering. "
Through gene therapy, today's elite athletes could be tomorrow's freak
performers," said the Sunday Times of London. Trouble is, by the time the freak
show arrives (hey, maybe we're living in it already) it will seem normal.

    Imagine. In addition to farm teams, franchise owners set up breeding farms,
developing genetic thoroughbreds in the various sports. Or, they take willing
athletes already in their prime and modify them for specific tasks. All these
possibilities were seen in the long-gone 20th century (well, a day gone, by some
accurate calculations) - the old East German state, for one, was a model for
cheating, and scientific breakthroughs continue apace.

    Delivering the goods to the consumer is very much part of the sporting
experience and as the systems evolve they will become ever more efficient and
interactive. A few years ago it would have seemed impossible but in some arenas
these days fans already are sitting at video screens that allow them to place
refreshment orders and choose remote camera angles, vote on players of the game,
etc. Why simply watch the live action taking place only metres away (the
old-fashioned sports experience) when you can enhance your vision
electronically?

    Home computers, likewise, are increasingly used to interface with live
sporting events. You be the director, as well as the spectator. Well, at what
point do the fans begin somehow to control the players themselves, decide the
games' outcomes? Or, at what point are the players wired up in such a cyber way
that you can better experience their exhilaration and pain?

    As in the past, the future holds major conflict between owners and athletes.
Labour stoppages, market contractions, etc., eventually undermine baseball,
creating a Major Eight Elite (MEE) league, in which every team makes the post-
season but huge bonuses are paid out according to regular-season standings.

    In hockey, the Canadian government finally relents and allows NHL teams a
share of lottery and other gambling revenues. Interactivity reaches a new level
as spectators are allowed to bet on the outcome of each play - a successful
pass, a goal, a penalty, whatever, right from their seats. The Ottawa Senators
relocate to Niagara Falls where they become the Black Jacks and play out of
Bally's Ka-Ching Casino and Ice Palace.

    Anyway, here are some more glimpses of what will or might be, bearing in
mind what Yogi Berra, another old baseballer, cautioned a long time ago: "You
have to know where you're going, or you'll end up somewhere else."

    LEMIEUX MAKES COMEBACK: Does he ever. No shocker there, but you may be
surprised to learn
 that Mario Lemieux loves the game so much, he plays until he
 breaks every Gretzky record in the book, plus Gordie Howe's mark
 for longevity (plus the unofficial all-time salary earned mark,
 naturally). Last we saw in our time travels, he was skating on a
 line with son Austin and grandson Wayne.

    LINDROS JOINS LEAFS: Eric Lindros finally joins the Leafs after becoming a
free agent
 at age 31, having stayed in shape by playing on the international
 beach volleyball tour. Lindros scores 30 points in his first 10
 games with the Leafs, but in his 11th suffers his umpteenth, and
 worst, concussion. The good thing is he has no memory of the
 unfortunate incident, which involved Bob Clarke's own one-game
 comeback at age 54.

    XFL TACKLES COMPETITION: In a desperate attempt to boost sagging TV ratings,
XFL founder
 Vince McMahon suits up himself at middle linebacker for the
 Toronto Torture, vowing to "ring the bell" of Doug Flutie,
 lured out of retirement one more time to play for the Big Apple
 Road Rage. League commissioner, Mankind, calls the developments
 "alarming" and vows that he'll appoint a committee of
 cheerleaders to look into it. Three-time Minnesota Governor Jesse
 (Body Parts) Ventura says it's "just football the way it was
 meant to be played."

    UNSCHEDULED DAY OFF: The NBA's Denver Nuggets, building on the trend they
started in
 2000 with a one-day work stoppage, go on a week-long wildcat
 strike, demanding the franchise be moved to Acapulco because,
 they point out, the weather's better down there in February. They
 win.

    A-WAD SPENDS SOME OF IT: Alex Rodriguez demands the Texas Rangers spend some
money on
 pitching, after they win fewer than 80 games in each of the two
 years of his quarter-billion dollar contract that kicked in after
 the two-year lockout ended in 2003. Finally, the Rangers go out
 and sign the starting staff of the Nippon Ham Fighters. A-Rod
 picks up the tab for the relievers. The Rangers still finish out
 of the playoffs.

    NEW HORIZONS FOR TIGER: After sweeping golf's majors (plus, winning the
Triple Crown
 Trophy, consisting of the U.S., British and Canadian Opens) three
 years running, Tiger Woods runs as Nike candidate for the U.S.
 presidency. He wins, naturally. Then, supported by populist
 movements in the various countries, he declares he's going to run
 coincidentally for another triple crown - head of state in
 Canada, Great Britain and Thailand. He wins, naturally.

    SISTERS GO BEYOND TENNIS: The Williams sisters, Venus and Serena, the first
sisters to
 finish one-two in the tennis majors, become the first siblings to
 share the Academy Award for best actress for their performances
 in the 2006 action thriller Line Calls. Directed by John McEnroe.

    HEARD THIS BEFORE? Having stunned the world with victory in the Gold Cup in
2000,
 followed by victories in both the Copa America and Confederations
 Cup in 2001, Canada fails to score a goal and is eliminated in
 the first round of competition after qualifying for the World Cup
 for the first time since Mexico in 1986. "More kids play soccer
 than any other sport but we need our own top-level professional
 league. We have to start developing more offensive players,"
 said Canada's head coach, Mid Fielder. "Believe me, we'll do
 things differently leading up to the next tournament, in 2022."

    WHEN PIGS FLY: Hazel McCallion declares a civic holiday after Don Cherry's
 Mississauga IceDogs complete their first winning season, the year
 after fighting is banned from junior hockey.

    LED BY OUR CURLERS: The 2010 Vancouver Winter Games are a roaring success. .
. . The
 Leafs trade Mats Sundin. . . . Vince Carter stays with the
 Raptors. . . . Elvis Stojko wins gold. . . . Mike Weir wins
 major. . . . Wayne Gretzky diagnosed with arthritis. . . .
 Canadian women win Olympic hockey gold. . . . Golf returns to
 Olympics. . . . Soldout ACC Sunday marathon tripleheader features
 arena football, box lacrosse and indoor soccer.


GRAPHIC: TORONTO STAR FILE PHOTO
 PRESIDENT TIGER?
 After running out of challenges in the golf world, wouldn't a career in
politics - perhaps even a triple crown - make sense for Tiger Woods? HEAD GAMES:

 Will Eric Lindros finally join the Leafs? TORONTO STAR FILE PHOTOS
 CRYSTAL BALL GAZING:
 Could lure of Hollywood be in the stars for tennis sisters Venus (above left)
and Serena Williams? And will Alex Rodriguez, right, find new ways to spend all
that money? SUPER:
 Just how long will Mario Lemieux's comeback last?

LOAD-DATE: January 1, 2001


                              398 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Sun Media Corporation
                      London Free Press (Ontario, Canada)

                   December 28, 2000, Thursday, Final EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. A12

LENGTH: 382 words

HEADLINE: BLOOD STUDY PROMISES HELP FOR TRANSPLANTS SCIENTISTS IDENTIFY TWO
TYPES OF STEM CELLS, FORESEE BETTER MATCH TO PATIENTS

BYLINE: ANNE-MARIE TOBIN, CP

DATELINE: TORONTO

BODY:


   Researchers here have discovered two distinct types of stem cells in the
blood system, a finding that could eventually help patients undergoing
transplants or gene therapy receive the most appropriate kind of stem cells.

   Scientists at the Hospital for Sick Children found human stem cells differ in
how they work after a transplant. Some function for the first month and then
disappear; others only function after several months but appear to keep on
working.

   The findings are reported in the January issue of the scientific journal
Nature Immunology.

   "There was one kind of stem cell that was very promptly active right after
transplant, but it would be transient, it would sort of go away after a period
of time," Dr. John Dick, a geneticist who led the team, said yesterday.

   "And then there was another class of stem cells that would take some period
of time to get going. But once it got going, it would be permanent. It would be
more long-lived."

   Dick said the study provides a better understanding of how the human blood
system works.

   Stem cells are the cells from which the entire blood system grows. Stem cell
transplants -- a form of bone marrow transplants -- are used widely in treating
different types of cancer, anemia and auto-immune disorders.

   Nowadays, they're also seen as a source of potential therapy for people with
a variety of genetic disorders.

   "There's an explosion of interest in harnessing the power of stem cell
transplantation," Dick said.

   "This now provides a way that people can target the kind of stem cells that
they want. For most applications that's going to be the long-term kind but . .
. I think that there could be applications for the short-term kind as well."

   The long-term repopulating stem cells could be used for transplants to
correct genetic disorders or in some kinds of cancer therapy, he said.

   But Dick said short-term repopulating stem cells could play a role, for
instance, in generating new blood cells after cancer patients have their blood
systems damaged by large doses of chemotherapy.

   In an accompanying editorial, U.S. scientists Ihor Lemischka and Craig Jordan
write that finding and characterizing the relatively rare stem cell was the
scientific equivalent of looking for a needle in a haystack.

LOAD-DATE: December 28, 2000


                              399 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                     December 28, 2000, Thursday, Edition 1

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 448 words

HEADLINE: SICK KIDS SCIENTISTS DISCOVER 2 TYPES OF STEM CELLS IN BLOOD

BYLINE: Anne-Marie Tobin

BODY:

    Canadian researchers have discovered two distinct types of stem
 cells within the blood system, a finding that could improve the
 treatment given to patients undergoing transplants or gene
 therapy.

    Scientists at the Hospital for Sick Children found that human stem cells
differ in how they work after a transplant - some function for the first month
then disappear, while others begin to function after several months but appear
to keep on working.

    The researchers' findings are reported in the January issue of the journal
Nature Immunology.

    Stem cells are the cells from which the entire blood system grows. Stem cell
transplants - a form of bone marrow transplants - are used widely for treating
different types of cancer, anemia and immune disorders.

    Today, they're also seen by specialists as a source of potential therapy for
people with some genetic disorders.

    Dr. John Dick, a geneticist who led the Sick Kids team, said the study
provides a better understanding of how the human blood system works.

    "There's an explosion of interest in harnessing the power of stem cell
transplantation," he said. "Everybody knows about bone marrow transplants in
cancer patients, but people want to do gene therapy - use things like
(umbilical) cord blood to transplant.

    "This now provides a way that people can target the kind of stem cells that
they want. For most applications, that's going to be the long-term kind but . .
. I think that there could be applications for the short-term kind as well."

    The long-term repopulating stem cells could be used for transplants to
correct genetic disorders or in some kinds of cancer therapy, he said, while
short-term repopulating stem cells could play a role, for instance, in
generating new blood cells after cancer patients have their blood systems
damaged by large doses of chemotherapy.

    In an editorial accompanying the study, U.S. scientists Ihor Lemischka and
Craig Jordan wrote that finding and characterizing the relatively rare stem cell
is the scientific equivalent of looking for a needle in a haystack.

    Over the last decade, Dick's group has developed a system to reproduce the
entire human blood system in mice to study how stem cells function.

    Other members of the team are Dr. Guillermo Guenechea, Dr. Olga Gan and
graduate student Craig Dorrell.

    More work needs to be done to figure out factors such as the ratio of short-
to long-term repopulating stem cells in the body, or whether the ratio changes
as someone grows from newborn to adult, Dick said.

    "We're just at the bottom of the mountain looking up," Dick said. "But now,
at least we know there's a mountain there."


GRAPHIC: ANDREW STAWICKI/TORONTO STAR
 OF MICE AND MEN:
 Dr. John Dick headed team that discovered two types of stem cells. Much of the
research was done on mice.

LOAD-DATE: December 28, 2000


                              403 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Sun Media Corporation
                      London Free Press (Ontario, Canada)

                    December 8, 2000, Friday, Final EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. A7

LENGTH: 232 words

HEADLINE: OTHER ORGANS COULD BE PROGRAMMED TO MAKE INSULIN, RESEARCH SUGGESTS

BYLINE: CP

DATELINE: TORONTO

BODY:


   It may be possible to fool cells in the gut into producing insulin and --
more importantly -- releasing it exactly when diabetics need it, suggest results
of some basic research at the University of Alberta.

   The findings of what is called a proof-of-concept study point to the
possibility that one day another organ might be genetically programmed to
produce and distribute insulin, a task carried out by the pancreas in
non-diabetics.

   "At some point in the future, we may be able to do away with those nasty
insulin injections . . . and better mimic how insulin is normally made and
released -- and therefore hopefully ameliorate those diabetic complications,"
chief researcher Tim Kieffer said from Edmonton yesterday.

   The study was published today in Science, a major research publication. It
was funded by the Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation, the Alberta Heritage
Foundation for medical research, the Canadian Institutes of Health Research and
the Canadian Diabetes Association.

   The findings mark the second time in recent weeks that Alberta researchers
have reported promising results of gene therapy studies aimed at finding a cure
for type 1 or juvenile diabetes.

   About 225,000 Canadians have type 1 diabetes, caused when the body's immune
system destroys the beta cells of the pancreas that produce insulin. The body
needs insulin to burn glucose for fuel.

LOAD-DATE: December 8, 2000


                              404 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                      December 8, 2000, Friday, Edition 1

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 381 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY TESTED FOR DIABETES TREATMENT

BODY:



    Cells in mice used to make insulin when food eaten

    Tanya Talaga

    MEDICAL REPORTER

    Diabetes specialists believe they've found a way to eliminate the need for a
pancreas: They've genetically engineered intestinal cells in mice to start
producing insulin.

    In healthy people, microscopic islet cells help manufacture insulin in the
pancreas. But people with juvenile, or Type 1, diabetes are unable to produce
insulin - a hormone the body needs to break down carbohydrates in food.

    "What we're trying to do here . . . is to consider gene therapy for the
treatment of diabetes," said Dr. Timothy Kieffer, lead researcher from the
University of Alberta.

    Almost 225,000 Canadians have juvenile diabetes, the more severe variety
that forces them to rely on insulin injections to survive. Such diabetics must
endure a constant rise and fall in sugar levels.

    The researchers from the U of A in Edmonton worked with others from the
University of Tennessee and the Boston Medical Centre.

    Essentially, the team has used meal-responsive cells located in the stomach
and upper intestine of mice to start producing insulin when food is eaten. The
usual job of these cells is to secrete a hormone that tells the pancreas food is
coming and insulin needs to be produced.

    But the team's experiments show these cells have the "necessary machinery to
make insulin and store it, ready to be released upon consumption of a meal, "
Kieffer explained in a phone interview.

    Research years away from being tested on humans

    Researchers are using genetic engineering to allow another cell in the body
to take over production of insulin. "The key is that we have selected a cell
that nature has already designed to be meal-responsive," he said.

    Kieffer stressed that the team's research has been successful only in mice
and it will be years before it will be able to move on to experimenting in
humans.

    The research is published today in the journal Science.

    Last June, a team from the U of A announced it had found a way to transplant
islet cells of dead donors into the livers of Type 1 diabetics.

    The transplant allows the liver to start functioning like a healthy human
pancreas. Fourteen diabetics have undergone the treatment.


LOAD-DATE: December 8, 2000


                              416 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Sun Media Corporation
                      London Free Press (Ontario, Canada)

                   November 23, 2000, Thursday, Final EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. E12

LENGTH: 406 words

HEADLINE: INNOVATION COULD LEAD TO CURE FOR DIABETES, SCIENTISTS BELIEVE

BYLINE: HELEN BRANSWELL, CP

DATELINE: TORONTO

BODY:


   A team of South Korean and Canadian researchers have induced remission in
rats and mice with Type 1 or juvenile diabetes using a novel form of gene
therapy.

   While human testing could be nearly a decade off, the team believes the
therapy offers real promise as a potential cure for diabetes.

   "We expect this breakthrough to pave the way for us to develop a future
therapy which, we hope, will cure diabetes in people," said team member Ji- Won
Yoon, who holds a chair in diabetes research at the University of Calgary.

   But translating success in rodents into a cure for humans is not a sure
thing. More levels of testing are needed before the team can contemplate human
trials, Yoon said from Calgary.

   "We have to approach the higher or larger animals, like dogs or monkeys. And
then if we succeed in these trials, then we may consider the approach to humans.
That's far away, anyway, from now."

   The lead author on the study is Dr. Hyun Chul Lee of Yonsei University
Medical School in Seoul, South Korea. The article is being published today in
the journal Nature.

   Type 1 or juvenile diabetes occurs when the body's immune system destroys the
beta cells in the pancreas, which produce insulin. It isn't known what triggers
the attack.

   The body needs insulin to burn glucose for fuel. Trying to break down glucose
without insulin has been likened to trying to cook food without heat.

   Without insulin, glucose builds up in the blood system of people with Type 1
diabetes, leading to a variety of ailments including blindness, heart disease,
stroke and kidney disease.

   Currently, people with juvenile diabetes must take regular insulin injections
to regulate the glucose in their systems.

   The Juvenile Diabetes Foundation of Canada estimates about 225,000 Canadians
have Type 1 diabetes. They also estimate nearly half a million North Americans a
year die from diabetes and its complications.

   The team created a genetically engineered virus to serve as the vehicle to
transport a gene known as SIA into the liver of the diabetic rodents.

   The gene senses glucose levels and kicks in to prompt the creation of a
modified insulin that then goes into action.

   Mice and rats injected with the compound showed normal glucose levels within
a week or two of treatment, after only one injection.

   And they remained in remission months later -- five months in mice, eight in
rats -- without apparent side-effects.

LOAD-DATE: November 23, 2000


                              417 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                      November 20, 2000, Monday, Edition 1

SECTION: SPORTS

LENGTH: 880 words

HEADLINE: GENETICALLY ALTERED ATHLETES MAY BE NEXT

BODY:



    In an experiment that has enormous implications for sports, a scientist
recently took a gene from a fly, modified it, then reinserted it into the
insect.

    As he had thought he might, the researcher discovered that "the strength of
the fly's flight muscles were increased by 300 per cent," according to a report
in the Sunday Times of London.

    One is reminded of the science fiction classic, The Fly, in which a man's
genes get mixed up with a fly's resulting in, well, horrific results. There is
no suggestion in this new research of macabre cross-species inter-mixing - but
boosting human performance through gene therapy or genetic engineering, says the
Times, may become known as "doping from hell."

    The fly study was mentioned as part of a report delivered in Copenhagen last
week by Swedish professor Bengt Saltin, an expert in exercise physiology.

    "Through gene therapy, today's elite athletes could be tomorrow's freak
performers," says the Times. "Using a virus as the transport agent, particular
genes can be inserted into the cell to create all kinds of change" - as early as
the next Summer Games in Athens in 2004.

    "The sprinter can have more fast twitch muscles, the long distance runner
can have the gene that produces the blood-boosting hormone erythropoietin, the
high jumper can opt for localized muscle growth in his take-off leg and the
basketball player may want four or five extra inches in height. It will all be
possible."

    "It is very scary," said Montreal's Dick Pound, an IOC vice-president and
head of its World Anti Doping Agency.

    Added professor Saltin: "If we do not win this battle, we will eliminate
sport as we know it. I don't believe we can do it with other technology. This
will be too hard to detect. Sport can only survive through a new philosophy, a
new morality.

    "When Roger Bannister broke four minutes for the mile, it was an achievement
acclaimed across the world. Will the athlete who runs the first two-hour
marathon be similarly recognized. I don't think so."

    OF CARLOS AND CURLERS: Not that he'd have the final word on the matter, but
maybe the
 Jays ought to ask Carlos Delgado before they swing any deal that
 involves Raul Mondesi. The latter was crucial to Delgado's
 success last season and after Mondesi got hurt Delgado's MVP run
 fizzled out. . . . Heard on the U.S. telecast of the weekend's
 women's golf tournament, with reference to Lori Kane and Mike
 Weir: "Canadians love their golfers nearly as much as their
 hockey players." Oh yeah? Where do our curlers fit in, anyway? .
 . . Milwaukee coach George Karl, on the referees' deference to
 Vince Carter Saturday night: "Vince Carter is a great player,
 but I don't think even he would like to be kissed like he was. .
 . . Vince Carter could do anything he wanted and get a foul. Jump
 into people, throw his arms into people and the whistle blew."
 Carter and the Raptors, of course, have complained bitterly in
 the past of not getting the calls. Maybe it all depends on your
 point of view.

    HOCKEY IN HOUSTON? If a Canadian NHL franchise heads south any time soon,
put
 Houston on the list of possible destinations (headed by
 Portland). That Texas city has approved construction of a $175
 million (U.S.) downtown and owners of the NBA Rockets are talking
 about bringing in an NHL team for 2005, after the next collective
 bargaining agreement is hammered out between the league and its
 players - making ownership in the NHL more attractive, or so they
 hope.

    STILL AVAILABLE: Just about everything with a pricetag on it sold at
yesterday's
 Maple Leaf Gardens auction with the possible exception of Dmitri
 Khristich, the underperforming winger (five points in 20 games)
 with the $3.25 million (U.S.) pricetag.

    'BE A GOON': Tom FitzGerald in the San Francisco Chronicle: "Portland Trail
 Blazer forward Rasheed Wallace's temper would have to cool
 considerably to be considered volcanic. Last season, he set an
 NBA record with 38 technical fouls. . . . "I just try to go out
 there and play and be a monster, be a beast, be a goon," Wallace
 says. Athletes know how important it is to set goals.

    FOUL IS FAIR: Kevin Garnett of the Timberwolves has picked up several
technical
 fouls this season, for trash talking and taunting. His coach,
 Flip Saunders, says that's all right with him. "K.G.'s
 emotional," says Saunders. "He gets excited. He's done that in
 the past. For me, I think people come to see enthusiasm. I don't
 think they want to see robots playing basketball. If they do,
 they can go play Nintendo games or Sega games. I think they want
 to see personalities, so unless it's something that's really
 flagrant, my preference is to let it go, because I think that's
 what people like to see."

    QB OR NOT QB: Long before there was a Flutie-Johnson quarterback
controversy,
 there was the rivalry in San Francisco between Joe Montana and
 Steve Young. "We were pretty competitive through that time,"
 Montana told Fox Sports recently. "There's things that took
 place that I don't know can ever be patched up."

    Garth Woolsey's Fair and Foul appears Mondays, Tuesdays, Thursdays and
Saturdays. You can message him at sports@thestar.ca


LOAD-DATE: November 20, 2000


                              423 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                     October 28, 2000, Saturday, Edition 1

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 522 words

HEADLINE: CANCER DRUG'S TEST RESULTS EXPECTED SOON

BYLINE: Tanya Talaga

BODY:



    as tumour-starving

    endostatin finishes

    first round of trials


    A promising experimental cancer drug that has wiped out tumours in mice has
finished the first round of human testing.

    Results of initial safety tests on endostatin, the much anticipated cancer
drug created under the guidance of world-renowned Harvard surgeon Dr. Judah
Folkman, will be reported at a cancer meeting in Europe next month.

    The human trials are being conducted by doctors at Houston's M.D. Anderson
Cancer Centre, Boston's Dana Farber Cancer Institute and the Cancer Centre at
Madison, Wis.

    "I look forward to hearing the results," Folkman said yesterday at the
Gairdner Foundation's annual scientific symposium at the University of Toronto.

    Folkman is a pioneer in angiogenesis, the growth of new blood vessels.

    Endostatin is a natural protein that blocks blood vessel formation,
essentially starving tumours by cutting off the blood supply. In lab animals
with cancer, endostatin has been shown to stop tumour growth.

    Three years ago, news of endostatin set off a firestorm of publicity about
the possibility of curing cancer - from major magazine covers to newspaper
articles.

    Folkman was thrust into the spotlight and public expectation intensified,
much to his dismay. "It's hard to translate a theory in laboratory mice to
humans," he said.

    "We always worry about raising expectations because clinical trials are very
hard," he said, adding it will take years of human testing before endostatin is
available.

    Until now, human testing of endostatin has focused on its safety. In the new
year, the second phase of testing - on how well it works - will begin.

    Folkman is hopeful angiogenesis-inhibiting drugs will become a "partner" to
standard cancer therapy.

    "What we think is that angiogenesis inhibitors will be added to
chemotherapy, radiotherapy, immunotherapy and gene therapy," he said.

    "Hopefully, that'll reduce the high risk of drug resistance and high
toxicity. "

    Since endostatin is a natural compound, it doesn't have detectable toxic
effects, a key drawback of chemotherapy, which makes patients nauseous and weak.

    Another big problem with chemotherapy is that it can frequently beat back
tumours only to have them return a few months later. This happens because the
tumours have become drug-resistant.

    For the past 50 years, almost all cancer therapy has been aimed at the
cancer cell, Folkman said during a speech yesterday. "But this cell can quickly
become drug-resistant and conventional therapy has harsh side effects."

    In the last decade, angiogenesis research has blossomed around the world,
said Folkman. Right now in North America, at least 20 angiogenesis inhibitors
are being worked on.

    As a field, angiogenesis is growing in leaps and bounds as scientists make
links between it and other disorders - like endometriosis and macular
degeneration, a leading cause of blindness.

    "We are beginning to find the same processes are in many other diseases," he
said. "If you drain the Pacific Ocean, do not be surprised if the islands are
connected."


GRAPHIC: OPTIMISTIC:
 Dr. Judah Folkman, a leading cancer researcher at Harvard Medical School, takes
part in Gairdner Foundation conference at the University of Toronto yesterday.

LOAD-DATE: October 28, 2000


                              424 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                      October 27, 2000, Friday, Edition 1

SECTION: LIFE

LENGTH: 382 words

BODY:

    Gene therapy successfully reverses cellular changes that occur in
 the brains of primates with Parkinson's disease, reports the
 journal Science. Researchers also report success in preventing
 the disease from progressing and reversing functional deficits or
 symptoms associated with the disease in monkeys displaying early
 signs of Parkinson's.

    Breast cancer A new laser imaging system that provides more detailed views
of
 breast tissue than traditional mammograms, but without the
 painful squeezing, has been developed at Clemson University in
 South Carolina. In early stages, it was also able to predict
 whether the tumor was benign or malignant.


    Chronic heartburn A new valve repair procedure for chronic heartburn
sufferers may
 eliminate the need for daily medication or surgery. The new
 approach to treating the disease, also known as reflux, is
 endoscopic suturing. It's being performed at
 Rush-Presbyterian-St. Luke's Medical Center in Chicago.

    HIV Resources are not being allocated in the most cost-effective
 fashion, say researchers at the Center for AIDS Prevention
 Studies at the University of California, San Francisco. They
 argue more risk reduction money goes toward preventing
 heterosexual transmission of HIV even though the rates of
 infection among heterosexuals appear to be falling. Conversely,
 the rates of HIV infection for men who have sex with men have
 remained stable and may even be increasing.

    Lung cancer A potential chemical marker in bone marrow that may help
identify
 when lung cancer is present has been found by researchers at Duke
 University Medical Center in Durham, N.C., according to a report
 at the clinical congress of the American College of Surgeons. The
 marker may help to screen out lung cancer victims at an early
 stage, helping to determine what kind of treatment to use.

    Wounds A new spray-on gel that acts like an internal wound dressing
 inside the body has been developed by an American company,
 reports New Scientist magazine. The bright blue gel can be
 sprayed directly on organs during surgery to promote healing and
 prevent post-surgical scarring.

    FROM THE STAR'S NEWS SERVICES

    For more health news, visit www.thestar.com/editorial/health.


LOAD-DATE: October 27, 2000


                              425 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                      October 27, 2000, Friday, Edition 1

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 526 words

HEADLINE: NEW PARKINSON'S DRUG LOOMS

BODY:



    Huntly Collins

    PHILADELPHIA - Scientists have used a novel gene therapy to reverse signs of
Parkinson's disease in monkeys, a finding that could lead to breakthrough
treatments for the debilitating neurological disorder that causes uncontrollable
tremors and muscle weakness in people.

    The experimental gene drug - developed by a team of American, Swiss and
French scientists - makes use of a gutted AIDS virus to deliver a growth- factor
gene to the part of the brain that is destroyed in Parkinson's.

    The drug, which was injected directly into the brains of four aging rhesus
monkeys and five young adult monkeys, prevented the brain-cell death that occurs
with Parkinson's and reversed symptoms of the disease, scientists report in
today's issue of the journal Science.

    "It's the most potent approach I've seen," said Jeffrey Kordower, director
of the Research Centre for Brain Repair at Rush Presbyterian-St. Luke's Medical
Centre in Chicago, who led the research team.

    Since monkeys don't naturally acquire Parkinson's, the scientists
artificially induced the disease by giving the younger monkeys a toxic chemical
that kills the same brain cells that are destroyed in the human illness and
causes the same symptoms.

    Before they got the gene drug, the monkeys were so disabled they couldn't
reach out and pick up fruit during a test of their motor skills. After the
therapy, they could. By contrast, untreated monkeys never regained their motor
function.

    Kordower said the therapy, if it pans out in further tests, could be a
potent treatment and potential cure. But he said it would take three to five
years to gain the regulatory approval needed to test the approach in humans.

    'It's the most potent approach I've seen.' Dr. Howard Hurtig, a neurologist
who co-directs the Parkinson's
 Disease and Movement Disabilities Centre at Pennsylvania Hospital
 in Philadelphia, called the study "very impressive." He said
 the approach has "great potential," but cautioned that what
 works in artificially diseased monkeys may not work in the
 natural-occurring disease in humans.

    In an accompanying commentary in Science, Lars Olson, a neuroscientist at
the Karolinska Institute in Stockholm, Sweden, said the approach provides "an
optimistic outlook" for treating not just Parkinson's but also other fatal
neurological disorders such as Lou Gehrig's disease.

    Parkinson's, described as "the saddest of diseases" by James Parkinson in
1817, involves the progressive loss of muscle control. Although people typically
retain full mental capacity until the end, they have uncontrollable muscle
tremors, stiffness and weakness that make it difficult to eat, wash and dress
themselves.

    The cause of the illness, which usually afflicts people over 60, is unknown.
It occurs when certain nerve cells deep in the brain begin to die, reducing the
production of dopamine, a chemical messenger that regulates muscle contractions.

    The current mainstay of treatment is a drug known as L-dopa (levodopa),
which replaces the lost dopamine. It alleviates symptoms but only temporarily.

    PHILADELPHIA INQUIRER


LOAD-DATE: October 27, 2000


                              426 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                     October 26, 2000, Thursday, Edition 1

SECTION: BUSINESS

LENGTH: 838 words

HEADLINE: A POLITICAL SLOGAN, IF NO SOLUTION, IS AT HAND

BODY:



    It's the end of October. The leaves are still clinging to the trees, the
weather and the stock market are both capricious (it's usually colder, and more
bearish by now, but warm air keeps returning, and the market falters but then
stubbornly continues to surge).

    Halloween is just around the corner (is your kid's costume ready?) and, for
a few days on both sides of the border, political candidates and their massive
party machines are scurrying around, trying to find that one "hook" that will
make ordinary middle-class North Americans take the bait and vote for them.

    And what do the simple folk do?

    Oh, we steadfastly get up on these dark mornings, send our children off to
school (hug, wave, here's your lunch, don't forget your project), go to work
(Hi, Sue, whassup, is there a meeting at 10?), pay our bills, dream our dreams.

    Are we angry and looking to teach someone a lesson?

    Mr. Chretien, if you spend one more of my tax dollars on a fountain in
anyone's riding, you're going in head first. Mr. Day, if you think you can ride
in on your white horse, er, Sea-Doo, and tamper with our fundamental decisions
(a woman's right to choose, capital punishment) and make us fear crime when you
have no business doing so, you're going in the water, too.

    Are we anxious? Are we stressed? Are we overworked and mentally ill in
unprecedented numbers?

    Worried about health care, fed up with education battles?

    Don't worry, there'll be a pollster around shortly to take our pulse and
rush the results to those who need them. A slogan, if not a solution, is heading
our way.

    Or, conversely, are we satisfied and well fed, prosperous and hopeful in a
way we haven't been in years? Do we dare to believe in progress in a way we
haven't for a long, long time?

    Consider this: We are smarter than our politicians and we have been for a
while.

    It's a little lonely, not having a Churchill or a Roosevelt or even a
Trudeau, but we make do, we get by, we fashion lives that work, we run ahead of
all our leaders on both sides of the border.

    How do we know we are smarter?

    Well, for example, the latest American census finally showed what most women
and men already know: The majority of women with small children now go to work.
They're finding all sorts of ways to combine working with good parenting, and
suddenly on the American network news this week, we saw women being interviewed
saying it's not just about money, we've invested a lot in our lives and we want
to work. But we do need good child care and flexible working arrangements.

    This is news?

    As working women, we've changed the landscape of home and work, but very few
of our male or even female politicians really get it. Or if they do get it, they
frame it negatively. They make it about fear and neglecting our kids, or about
fatigue and glass ceilings. They don't talk about surging forward, finding ways
to make our lives work.

    Not even the woman who heads one of our political parties - Alexa McDonough
of the NDP - taps into this sense of progress. She's worried and rightly so
about the gap between rich and poor, but every time she opens her mouth, lets
face it, she's a drag.

    No sizzle.

    Speaking of sizzle, someone I know reminded me recently about his
grandmother, who used to tell him, eyes shining, what it was like at the turn of
the last century. Oh, she said, it was so exciting - there were so many new
things happening that changed our lives - sanitation, new uses for electricity,
medical advances, transport, it felt as though we were hurtling forward.

    'She remembered that everyone believed in the future' And then what
happened, he would ask her. And she would reply,
 eyes clouding over, two hideous world wars and a century of
 turmoil. But still, she remembered the excitement. She remembered
 that everyone believed in the future.

    Now she's gone and her grandson, who is middle-aged, finds there are new
generations - he works with them in business every day - who have no experience
at all with war but who instead believe in progress because there's nothing in
their way anymore. They believe the future will be good, the economy will be
strong, the world will be theirs.

    At this turn of the century, there is also excitement and a belief in
progress. Scientists are doing remarkable gene therapy, people are shopping the
Internet in their pajamas, they are connecting by e-mail all over the world,
they're finding new and inventive ways to work.

    It's the first federal election campaign of the millennium. Great leadership
is never about worry, it's always about hope. Buy your kid's Halloween costume
on the way home from work, crack open a beer, or sip a nice glass of wine, and
when the pollster calls tonight, tell her you believe in the future.

    That ought to confound the whole bunch of them.

    Judith Timson's column runs every second Thursday. She can be reached c/o
Your Business, 1 Yonge St. Toronto, ON, M5E 1E6, or by fax at (416) 865-3630.


LOAD-DATE: October 26, 2000


                              429 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Sun Media Corporation
                      London Free Press (Ontario, Canada)

                   October 11, 2000, Wednesday, Final EDITION

SECTION: EDITORIAL/OPINION, Pg. A19

LENGTH: 626 words

HEADLINE: MORNING-AFTER PILL COMES WITH CAVEATS

BYLINE: SHARON OSVALD, LONDON FREELANCE WRITER

BODY:


   I have come to the conclusion that the bigger, louder and flashier the
message media try to sell me, the more I should be suspicious of it.

   Canadians are about to join their neighbours to the south in experiencing
just such a media blitz. This time, it isn't McDonald's, Nike or the merits of
Coca-Cola being sold, it's the morning-after pill.

   Billboards picturing a broken condom, print and radio ads, public
announcements and postcards from Planned Parenthood stating "You have 72 hours
to erase last night," are some of the strategies being used to reach the
American public about the benefits of this newly-marketed marvel.

   Two emergency contraceptives named Preven and Plan B have been approved in
Canada and we're soon going to be hearing a lot about them.

   Different than RU-486, which can be used during the first seven weeks of
pregnancy to induce an abortion, the morning-after pill is a combination of
female hormones, estrogens and progesterone given in two doses 12 hours apart.
It is being heralded as a huge step toward improving women's rights.

   If taken within 72 hours of intercourse, the pill stops ovulation and
prevents the fertilized egg from implanting itself in the uterine wall.

   Advocates deny the pill effectively causes an abortion (they argue conception
starts when the fertilized egg becomes implanted in the uterine wall), while
opponents call the drug an "abortifacient," believing conception begins at
fertilization.

   After reading about the pill, I decided to go on a pilgrimage of sorts to
decide what I believed about conception. When does life begin -- at
fertilization or implantation?

   After a week of reading, surfing the Web, talking to people and
soul-searching, I still don't know. But I do know one thing. Saying I'm not sure
is not the same as saying it's OK.

   While we admit our moral obligations when considering the ethics of
advancements in science, reproduction and gene therapy, we are much quicker to
leave our consciences behind when it comes to matters that affect personal
convenience.

   A national advisory committee on emergency contraceptives is working to make
the contraceptives available to women without a doctor's prescription.

   Bonnie Johnson of Planned Parenthood Canada says: "Every fertile woman in
Canada should have it in her purse."

   This over-promotion and dangerously nonchalant attitude may produce fewer
unplanned babies, but I fear it will also produce more careless sexual behaviour
as people take more chances in the "heat of the moment," armed with their
back-up plan.

   Credit card companies make huge windfalls on the fact it is human nature to
abuse and overuse safety nets. With this type of ease and access, it's only a
matter of time before emergency contraceptives become every-Monday-morning
contraceptives.

   Let's not forget that prolonged use of regular birth control pills can result
in serious health risks, such as blood clots in the legs or lungs, heart attack,
stroke, liver damage, liver tumours, gallbladder disease and high blood
pressure. Though these cases may be rare, should we so blatantly promote a
product without mentioning the risks, especially in the absence of long-term
tests for side-effects?

   Unplanned pregnancies are inconvenient, but often have a way of surprising
the recipient with unexpected pleasure.

   Nothing has been invented yet that erases the past. For every action there is
a reaction.

   This magic remedy might take away the pregnancy, but it won't delete other
outcomes of reckless sexual activity, such as sexually transmitted diseases,
AIDS or deep emotional scars.

   Perhaps we should be promoting responsible, accountable, monogamous
relationships.

   Now, there's something to put on a billboard.

NOTES:
Sharon Osvald is a London freelance writer.

LOAD-DATE: October 11, 2000


                              432 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                     September 18, 2000, Monday, Edition 1

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 1278 words

HEADLINE: OLYMPIC ATHLETES AND DOPING: WHY IT'S BEEN GOING ON SO LONG

BYLINE: John Hoberman

BODY:



    Five years ago, one of the great runners of Olympic history told me how the
doping epidemic in elite sport had finally made it impossible for him to enjoy
the Games. Since the 1972 Munich Olympiad, he said, uncertainty about drug use
by Olympic athletes had made it impossible to know "who the real winners are."

    Like other veterans of the pre-doping era, this Olympic champion had lived
to see his sport transformed by the anabolic steroids and other synthetic
hormones that, over the past generation, have become an integral part of some
Olympic sports.

    The urgent question hanging over the Sydney Games is whether the
International Olympic Committee (IOC) and the sports federations affiliated with
the IOC can reverse this pharmacological corruption of high-performance sport.

    One major obstacle is that the IOC delayed taking real action on research
and enforcement for many years. A credible anti-doping effort did not even begin
until 1998, a full 30 years after the IOC instituted limited drug testing in
1968. Between those Mexico City Games and the 1996 Atlanta Olympiad, IOC drug
testing produced 52 positive tests in some 54,000 athletes - fewer than one per
1,000. No one familiar with the doping practices of elite athletes took Olympic
drug testing seriously.

    Anti-doping reform was finally set into motion by the great doping scandal
that ruined the 1998 Tour de France cycling race. For the first time, the world
saw credible evidence of systematic and secretive doping of elite athletes
outside the former East Germany. The president of the IOC, Juan Antonio
Samaranch, responded to this crisis by proposing medically supervised (or
"safe") doping for Olympic athletes. The hostile response he got prompted the
IOC to schedule a World Anti-Doping Conference that took place in February 1999.

    At this meeting a series of government officials harshly criticized the IOC
for its failed record in the area of doping control. The positive result of this
conference was the World Anti-Doping Agency (WADA) that was inaugurated in
Lausanne on Jan. 13, 2000. Jointly operated by the IOC and outside members, WADA
lacks the independence a fully credible agency must have.

    Still, the transparency and accountability this consortium brings to
international doping control is unprecedented. In retrospect, it is clear that
only powerful non-IOC voices could change the politics of doping in a
fundamental way.

    Despite the efforts of WADA and Australian drug testers, the anti-doping
operation in Sydney faces some daunting challenges. One is the black market in
imported performance-enhancing drugs that has exploded in recent years.
Australian customs officials made 968 seizures during the period 1998-99, and
organized crime is reported to have entered this illicit trade.

    The sagging reputation of the IOC, which is still reeling from the 1999
bribery scandal, makes the drug testing operation at the Sydney Games a crucial
test for the "reformed" Olympians. For the first time in Olympic history, doping
control will be something more than the public relations operation that yielded
a grand total of two steroid positives among the 10, 000 athletes who competed
in Atlanta.

    Australian officials seem determined to put on the cleanest Games ever as a
matter of national pride. "If we can look back and say that we changed the face
of world sport because of what we did with drugs at the 2000 Olympics," says one
anti-doping official, "that would be just wonderful."

    The major innovation of the Sydney Games is the test for EPO, the blood-
boosting synthetic hormone that is reputed to be the drug of choice of many
endurance athletes such as runners, cyclists, and swimmers. This procedure
consists of a blood test and a urine test, and an athlete must fail both to
incur a doping violation. The great limitation of this test is that, while the
blood test can detect EPO use over the previous four weeks, the urine test can
detect use only over the previous three days.

    This means that, since EPO can boost performance up to four weeks after it
is taken, an EPO-abusing athlete could use the drug anywhere from one to four
weeks before arriving in Sydney and still pass the new test. While some
potential cheaters will be deterred, others will gain an unfair advantage with
little or no fear of detection.

    Nor has the IOC helped matters by its apparent refusal to subject the
eventual medal winners to the new test. The plan is to carry out between 300 and
400 unannounced tests in Sydney on athletes who might be tempted to use the drug
to improve their endurance.

    But if the IOC has so much confidence in this test, why not certify the EPO-
free status of Olympic medalists by subjecting them to this new procedure? Once
again, the IOC has raised questions about its commitment to exposing athletes
who cheat.

    For the past century, Olympic sport has been what a German sports scientist
once called "a gigantic experiment on the human organism," a vast public
operating theatre where human minds and bodies have been subjected to increasing
levels of pain and stress in the pursuit of higher and higher levels of
performance.

    At some point such a project must begin to crash, and that is what has been
happening over the past 20 years. The unending parade of doping scandals are
dramatic evidence that high-performance sport simply asks too much of the human
organism.

    As the head of the IOC Medical Commission, Alexander de Merode, said in
1988: "In some ways, what is being asked of athletes may be more than the human
body can do. Top athletes are workers like other workers, but nobody takes care
to protect them against themselves and against those that employ them."

    This Olympic official knew that athletes were dealing with intolerable
levels of stress, and then did nothing to decrease the inhuman demands of
Olympic sport. Small wonder he has always opposed strict doping penalties. He
knows that some athletes need their drugs just to make it through the day.

    The great irony of the doping crisis is that today's synthetic hormones will
be largely obsolete within about a decade. Some athletes competing in Sydney may
already be circumventing the EPO testing by using blood substitutes like
Hemopure or the veterinary drug Oxyglobin, which is used to treat anemia in
dogs.

    But the real threat to human athletic competition as we know it is genetic
therapies that will build muscle, promote the growth of blood vessels, and boost
the body's production of naturally occurring hormones like testosterone or human
growth hormone.

    All of these techniques will appeal to the more ambitious type of sports
physician who already accepts hormone doping. A medical scientist at the
University of Pittsburgh, working on a gene therapy to build the strength of
patients with muscular dystrophy, was contacted years ago by a sports scientist
who wanted to apply his technique to athletes.

    The Sydney Games are one of our last opportunities to prevent the further
transformation of sport into a high-performance freak show. As the president of
the French Biotechnology Institute put it recently: "We may eventually see
competitions in which the athletes' bodies have been allowed to be modified, but
under safe medical supervision."

    One can only wonder whether the sporting public in 2015 will call these
performers "athletes" or "creatures."

    John Hoberman is a professor of Germanic studies at the University of Texas.
He is the author of Mortal Engines: The Science Of Performance And The
Dehumanization Of Sport.


    "a gigantic experiment

    on the human organism."

LOAD-DATE: September 18, 2000


                              434 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                     September 15, 2000, Friday, Edition 1

SECTION: LIFE

LENGTH: 421 words

BODY:

    Factors other than repetitive movements of the arms or wrists may
 contribute to and predict the onset of forearm pain in the
 workplace, the British Medical Journal says. Dissatisfaction with
 support from supervisors and colleagues was, along with
 repetitive movements of the arms or wrists, associated with
 highest risk of future forearm pain. Other important predictors
 were high levels of psychological distress, presence of other
 physical symptoms and general anxiety about health. In the study,
 slightly more than 8 per cent of 1,200 participants in
 Manchester, England, reported forearm pain. Of these, 67 per cent
 also reported shoulder pain, 65 per cent back pain and 45 per
 cent chronic widespread pain.


    Depression A biological change can be recognized in children at risk for
 major depression before they develop the illness, according to
 the Archives Of General Psychiatry. Children with a family
 history of major depression produce significantly less growth
 hormone than their normal peers when given growth hormone
 releasing hormone. Researchers don't know whether the response is
 due to genetics or if it is a sign of family stress. However, it
 could give doctors a head start in treating children at risk for
 major depression before they become ill.

    Sores A protein spray found by fishing through the human genome helps
 heal the large, painful sores that plague many elderly patients,
 reports Human Genome Sciences Inc. It is the company's first
 success in making a drug using its genetics technology, rather
 than attempting to use the genes it has found in gene therapy.
 The protein spray, called repifermin, is made by a human gene
 called keratinocyte growth factor-2, or KGF-2. It was identified
 by screening 10,000 different genes to see which one might
 produce a protein that would heal skin.

    AIDS drugs New tests of the AIDS drug AZT show that, unlike infant monkeys
 exposed to the drug, the hearts of human newborns, are not harmed
 by the drug, the New England Journal Of Medicine says. The drug
 has caused some heart abnormalities in infant monkeys whose
 mothers had been exposed to it while pregnant. Studies in
 children have produced mixed results. The new finding is
 important because over the next 10 years, as many as 60,000
 children in the U.S. may be exposed to antiretroviral drugs in
 utero as their mothers are treated for HIV.

    For more health news, visit www.thestar.com/editorial/health.


LOAD-DATE: September 15, 2000


                              440 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                       August 20, 2000, Sunday, Edition 1

SECTION: BOD

LENGTH: 1142 words

HEADLINE: WHY IQ GENETICS WON'T MAKE PEOPLE SMARTER OR BETTER COMMENTARY

BYLINE: Bryan Appleyard

BODY:

    'INTELLIGENCE is the most widely prized of all human attributes. It
 is, we believe, that which most clearly distinguishes us from the
 other animals.

    We can think about, analyze and deliberately change the world; no other
earthly being is capable of such feats.

    Surely, therefore, the more intelligence we have, the more supremely human
we are.

    Now, a report to be published next year by the National Institutes of Health
(NIH) in Washington claims that we humans soon will be able to make ourselves
more intelligent.

    The NIH studied the DNA of 200 of the brightest children and found crucial
genetic differences that could provide, in the words of Robert Plomin, a leader
of the research, a "significant source of prediction for intelligence." In other
words, we shall be able to abort stupid babies, identify brilliant children at
birth and, ultimately, with the aid of gene therapy, "design" smarter children.

    Dr. Joe Tsien of Princeton University, who last year isolated a gene that
seemed to make mice more intelligent, put it in a nutshell: "This points to the
possibility that enhancement of learning and memory, or even IQ, is feasible
through genetic engineering."

    And Charles Murray, the compulsively controversial sociologist, argues that
such discoveries in genetics will show that intelligence is largely inherited
and not a product of the environment. Whether we like it or not, Murray insists,
our genes are our destiny.

    This is remarkable stuff, not because it's true, but because it almost
certainly isn't. The histories of genetics and the measurement of " intelligence
quotient" are histories of extravagant claims followed by muted retractions.

    Since the unravelling of the structure of the DNA molecule in 1953, we have
been consistently promised astounding new powers of intervention in human
reproduction and health. And since the early 1970s, when scientists discovered
how to "recombine" - manipulate - DNA, these promises have formed a publicity
deluge.

    Yet not a single person has been cured of anything by gene therapy, the
medical alteration of their DNA.

    Certainly, we appear to have found the genetic bases for many serious
single- gene disorders, including cystic fibrosis and muscular dystrophy, but
the only effective treatment so far to have arisen from these discoveries is
abortion.

    There are two possible responses to this. On the one hand, the claims might
merely be premature. Or, on the other, the science might be wrong.

    The latter possibility is now more widely accepted, as it has become clear
that genetics is nothing like the simple numbers game it once seemed.

    For one thing, the activity of DNA is fiendishly complex. In addition, a
small but growing minority of scientists is now questioning the idea that genes
are all that important and that many other things happening in a living cell
might be equally significant.

    But perhaps the most remarkable and dubious aspect of the latest claimants
to genetic wisdom is the breezy confidence with which they use the word "
intelligence."

    The scientific measurement of IQ is a modern obsession, inspired by the
spread of mass education. For more than 100 years, people have been subjected to
batteries of tests that aspire to rate their minds on a numerical scale.

    This has been crudely successful - somebody with an IQ of 80, for example,
will pass fewer exams and usually end up poorer than somebody with an IQ of 130.
But does this mean IQ is a real faculty of the brain or merely an index of our
ability to do well in society?

    Moreover, doubts about the consistency of IQ tests have been massively
increased by the discovery of what is called the Flynn effect.

    New Zealand researcher James Flynn applied old IQ tests from the 1920s to
modern children. They did incredibly well. Indeed, if IQ tests over the years
were measuring a consistent quality, then the human race was getting smarter at
an unbelievable rate.

    In reality, of course, what the Flynn effect showed was that IQ tests are
specific to the culture in which they are set; they're not objective
measurements of intelligence.

    And yet some people are more intelligent than others, and clever parents do
tend to have cleverer offspring. Intelligence appears to be a real thing and
there does seem to be an inherited component.

    But we do not know, other than intuitively, what intelligence is. And
although there may well be a large inherited component, there is also certain to
be an unquantifiable effect arising from an environment in which it is valued.

    In addition, we all know of apparently bright children who come to nothing
and of seemingly dull students who have been wildly successful.

    Passion and commitment may be as important as brain structure.

    The further point is that much of the development of the brain appears to be
" epigenetic" - it happens within an environment created by the genes, but not
under their control. It is conceptually dubious, therefore, directly to link
specific DNA sequences to the quality of the developed brain.

    In spite of all this, however, the NIH scientists could conceivably be
right.

    There is certainly a lot of pressure on them. Billions of investment dollars
are riding on the possibility of direct genetic intervention in human life,
especially in the realm of intelligence.

    IQ is now seen as our most valuable quality, the key to survival in the
high- tech, wired world.

    As David Canter, professor of psychology at the University of Liverpool, has
said: "In a society increasingly devoted to the processing of information rather
than the manufacturing of goods, we regard intelligence as the measure of human
worth."

    In other words, if scientists can deliver intelligence as a consumer good,
then they can write their own paycheques.

    But if they succeed and the brave new world of artificially enhanced IQ
finally arrives, it will turn out to be hell.

    Intelligence is not the supreme human attribute, as the long list of wicked,
clever men and women through the ages testifies.

    What matters, what really makes us human, is something even more elusive
than IQ. It's a complex combination of qualities that includes compassion,
sympathy, sensitivity, creativity, energy, talent and wisdom.

    These are the things that we really value. It is merely contemporary
perversity that makes us spend time and money pretending we don't.

    THE LONDON SUNDAY TIMES


LOAD-DATE: August 20, 2000


                              443 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                      August 12, 2000, Saturday, Edition 1

SECTION: LIFE

LENGTH: 1720 words

HEADLINE: PLUNGING INTO THE FOUNTAIN OF YOUTH

BYLINE: David Graham

BODY:



    Holistic approach measures many aspects of aging

    Toronto's Beresford Clinic takes a holistic approach to slowing
 down the passage of time over clients' bodies. Clockwise from
 left: Dr. Elaine Chin; Claire Lanouette; Parisa Moallemian; Penny
 Kendall-Reed; and Frank Beninger.

    Beresford clients go through a series of checks to establish
 their biological age. Only then does the clinic recommend a
 particular course of treatments.


    Toronto's Beresford clinic among growing

    list of establishments ready to turn back

    your biological clock


    LIFE WRITER

    Lynn and Jeremy Kendall are looking forward to growing young together.

    They're both 60 now. And as far as they're concerned, that's enough.

    To put a stop to all this aging nonsense, a few weeks ago they joined the
Longevity Program at Toronto's Beresford clinic, Canada's first multi-
disciplinary, anti-aging health care centre.

    Think of it as a shopping mall, a unique, one-stop emporium of anti-aging
services housed in a chic, two-storey clinic at 199 Avenue Rd. (There is another
location in Mississauga.)

    The Kendalls have always enjoyed an active lifestyle and throughout their
40- year marriage they conquered many hurdles.

    When they were 50 they trekked through Nepal together, covering 26
kilometres each day for two weeks. "Sometimes it was so steep you could reach
out in front of you and touch the mountain," says Jeremy.

    Now, 10 years later they are digging in their heels and preparing for yet
another big adventure . . . getting young again. "We've always valued our health
and we want to keep it for as long as possible," says Lynn.

    The operative word at the Beresford is multi-disciplinary. Because the cure
for aging is unlikely to be found in a single pill or procedure, people at the
Beresford approach the job of extending life with team work.

    Certainly a family doctor can offer advice on preventive medicine and a
plastic surgeon can nip and tuck away telltale sags. But imagine what a team of
physicians, cosmetic surgeons, naturopaths, fitness experts, massage therapists,
estheticians and image consultants can accomplish if they all put their heads
together to mastermind a plan of action aimed at slowing, halting or even
reversing your aging process.

    "Our services can be compared to a good retirement investment plan," says
Beresford family practitioner Dr. Elaine Chin, a specialist in menopause
management and anti-aging medicine. "From the very beginning we felt we could
contribute more to the client if we worked together as a team."

    The Beresford program, based on a model created by the popular Longevity
International Institute established in the United States by Dr. Vincent
Giampapa, was imported to Canada last month.

    Toronto's program now boasts 15 clients, including local talk show host Dini
Petty who turned 55 last January.

    Initially in the U.S. and now in Canada, Petty has been involved with
longevity treatments for a little more than a year.

    She was originally tested at the Longevity International Clinic in
Montclair, N.J. and was excited when the Beresford program started up in
Toronto.

    Now she's hooked.

    Just three weeks into the regimen, Petty reported that she could focus
better.  She was less tired and soon noticed more stamina and strength.

    Petty says her regular workouts got easier and her body shape began showing
signs of improvement. And it's no secret that she has embraced cosmetic surgery.

    Petty, who has tried various forms of alternative medicine for more than 20
years, dispells the criticisms that dog longevity medicine.

    Detractors often suggest programs like this are designed only for vain,
wealthy people who are afraid of growing old.

    "It's not a vanity issue. It's a health issue," says Petty. "I want to
maintain the quality of health that I have now for as long as possible."

    What's more, Petty insists that while the program may seem elitist now, she
predicts longevity medicine will in time will be available to everyone.

    "With so many people growing old, it makes sense to get in early and prevent
potential illnesses," says Petty.

    While the various services at the Beresford clinic can be ordered a la
carte, the Longevity Program is presented as a sort of private club for men and
women who hope to defer the signs and symptoms of age and illness as long as
possible.

    For an annual fee of about $6,000, the Beresford team pools considerable
expertise to create a personalized anti-aging program.

    "Fifteen years ago the notion of treating age like a disease was perceived
as toying with nature," says Chin.

    But as the massive boomer population began shuffling toward middle age, the
search for anti-aging solutions has intensified - especially when it comes to
decreased energy, diminished muscle strength, waning sex drive and reduced
mental and visual acuity, sagging skin, stooped posture, thinning hair and
thicker midsections.

    Because aging shows its sallow face in so many ways, the Beresford fights
the battle on many fronts.

    To get started, clients are put through a battery of tests that measure
biological markers of age, including sensory, motor, cognitive and pulmonary
functions.

    At the end you'll be assigned a biological age. This is your true age when
you compare your biological profile to the average North American population,
Chin says.

    They'll want urine, saliva and blood samples that could uncover early signs
of disease, hormone and mineral deficiencies and even expose unhealthy levels of
dangerous free radicals caused by pollutants such as alcohol, coffee and
pesticides.

    (The Beresford beauty salon promotes organic hair care products, including
colours and perms that use no chemical preservatives or artificial fragrances. )

    They check clients for hidden ailments, such as cancer, osteoporosis or
heart disease. They'll want to check for iron deficiencies and they'll want to
establish cholesterol levels.

    And Beresford will test for things OHIP won't cover, such as homocysteine,
which is a known risk factor for coronary artery disease. They also test for PSA
(prostate specific antigen) which is an indicator for prostate cancer.

    They even expose your skin to a sun-damage detector.

    The program is designed to diagnose problems early and begin treatment
before clients show symptoms.

    They ask questions about family and lifestyle. They subject their clients to
psychological tests to determine stress levels and find out whether they will be
motivated enough to stay with the program.

    While anti-aging doctors can offer any number of treatments, hormone
replacement therapy is an integral component of the program. At the Beresford
they offer two options depending on the client's needs.

    They can actually replace hormones such as estrogen, testosterone and
progesterone.

    Or they can prescribe natural supplements and hormonal precursors to boost
the body's natural hormone production. For example, soy, a plant derived and
chemically identical to human estrogen, can be a natural estrogen supplement.

    It's speculated that hormones play a significant role in the aging process.
And while some doctors believe hormone loss "is" aging, hormone replacement
therapy is fraught with controversy.

    For example, many women fear estrogen replacement therapies because of
possible associations with breast cancer. There may be a link between
testosterone and prostate cancer. And DHEA (Dehydropiandrosterone) may cause
liver damage, certain cancers, unwanted facial hair and an increased risk of
heart disease.

    The U.S. government has approved growth hormone injections, but they are not
legal here for the purposes of anti-aging therapy. The concern among detractors
is that such intra-muscular shots can accelerate the growth of abnormal cells
including cancer cells.

    The Beresford prefers to kick start the body's natural growth hormone
production with natural hormonal precursors.

    Nine to 12 months into the program, clients are retested to see if their
biological age has decreased. If all goes well, memory will improve, energy will
be up, and so on.

    Some clients, delighted with how young they feel, sign up for cosmetic
surgery, a hair transplant, spend time with the esthetician for some beauty
advice or get some wardrobe tips from the image consultant.

    'It's not like Western medicine where you hand over the responsibility

    to your doctor. In the end you are responsible

    for your own health.'

    Lily Lee, 50, who joined the Longevity Program a month ago, likes the fact
that it combines traditional and non-traditional therapies. Originally from Hong
Kong, Lee says she appreciates the clinics "holistic" approach.

    She hasn't completed her full round of tests yet. So she doesn't know her
biological age.

    Initially, Lee was intrigued by the comprehensive nature of the Beresford
program. "You get a complete assessment of your health."

    She acknowledges that clients do not simply hand their health over to the
team.

    "It requires a lot of effort on the part of each client," she says. "It's
not like Western medicine where you hand over the responsibility to your doctor.
In the end you are responsible for your own health."

    She concedes there is a small element of vanity in the program. Lee has had
her skin analyzed and she's already had a make-up session.

    "I'd like to look better than I do, but that's secondary," she says.

    The clinic's naturopath, Penny Kendall-Reed (Lynn and Jeremy's daughter),
believes the Beresford's timing is right because people are realizing their life
expectancy is getting longer and longer.

    And with the recent discovery of the human genome, the first nearly complete
map of the human genetic code, the scientific and medical communities are awed
by the role gene therapy will play in the aging process.

    The real crisis of mid-life may be that it lasts so long. "The baby boomer
generation is very pro-active," says Chin, suggesting the more than 10,000 North
Americans who turn 50 every day are refusing to go quietly into that long good
night.

    If the popularity of longevity programs is any indication, they've got their
chequebooks out and they'll fight to the finish.


LOAD-DATE: August 12, 2000


                              444 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                       August 11, 2000, Friday, Edition 1

SECTION: LIFE

LENGTH: 2449 words

HEADLINE: FURRY

BODY:



    to protect mutant mice

    Lab mice are a $200 million business.

    little

    test

    tubes genetics and human disease

    Lawrence Osborne

    SPECIAL TO THE STAR

    Inside a plastic laboratory container, two brown-coated mice are poring over
a new litter of grublike pups. A technician dips a pair of forceps into a tub of
disinfectant and then grabs one by the tail. It is Papa, and he begins squeaking
and wriggling as he is hoisted into the air.

    "He's the normal one," says Muriel Davisson, a prominent mouse genetics
researcher. "It's the female who's the mutant. Now look at her."

    The mother indeed looks unusual. Perpetually off balance, she stumbles
around her tiny offspring. Her coat is tatty and her face distinctly lopsided.
Her mousy gaze looks cross-eyed; she is also noticeably puny. I scan the
identification tag on the container: TS65DN.

    " 'DN' stands for Down syndrome," Davisson says quietly over my shoulder. "
We're mating her with a normal mouse to see how Down genes get passed on to
offspring. Have you ever seen a mouse with Down syndrome?"

    I have to admit that I have not.

    "That's not surprising," Davisson says. "They're extremely rare in the wild.
They get eaten in two seconds. But here, they get to live and have pups - Down
syndrome pups."

    We pick up the Down mother and examine her twitching, compressed face.

    "She's only a year old," says Joiel Davies, a research assistant. "But she
already looks like an old lady."

    What about the pups? Davisson points her forceps at two of them. "As you can
see," she goes on, "these two likely have Down as well. They're beginning to
twitch. Down, of course, is an entirely genetic disease. That's why these mice
are so crucial to us."

    In humans, Down arises as a result of a duplication of chromosome 21. In
mice, it is chromosome 16 that gets doubled. The proteins in human chromosome 21
and mouse chromosome 16 are similar but not identical. Thus, the mice have a
disorder something like Down, if not corresponding exactly to it. "It's not 100
per cent," Davisson admits. "But it's close enough. It's mouse Down."

    We are standing in one of the 47 "mouse rooms" of the Jackson Laboratory in
Bar Harbor, Me., one of the world's foremost facilities for breeding and
studying mice. This room alone holds 34,000 animals. The mice are stored in
racks of clear plastic containers, each one fitted with an exhaust pipe that
connects to the ceiling and siphons off used air. Each unit is equipped with
pine shavings, pellets and a water bottle.

    Inside the transparent boxes sit every variety of mouse imaginable: albino
mice, black mice, bald mice, piebald mice, fat mice, thin mice, bored mice,
epileptic mice. There are more varieties of mice here than in any natural
ecosystem and each has a specific scientific use. The Jackson rodents are
unwitting actors in cutting-edge research into the relationship between genetics
and human disease.

    "JAX mice," as the Jackson mice are known to scientists, are bred or
tailored to carry diseases that mirror those of humans. Through either
crossbreeding or genetic engineering - that is, by adding or "knocking out"
specific genes - Jackson scientists produce "transgenic model mice." These
rodents have been programmed from birth to develop tumours, inherit glaucoma or
reproduce milder pathologies, like obesity.

    The genetically engineered mouse strains have become the hottest items on
most labs' shopping lists. In fact, although the use of animals as lab subjects
had been declining in recent decades, the boom in transgenic mice has reversed
that trend. The rise is wholly attributable to genetics research.  Cheaper to
breed than primates yet genetically similar to humans, mice are playing a key
role in the development of gene therapies - and figure centrally in research
aiming to pinpoint the genetic basis of human disease.

    Indeed, so valued is the mouse that it is the only other mammal whose full
genetic code is being parsed by the U.S. National Institutes of Health and
Celera Genomics, the team that recently completed the Human Genome Project. (The
mouse sequence is expected by December.) Referred to as "fuzzy test tubes" by
scientists, mice are now worth their weight in gold. "The mouse," the journal
Science recently trumpeted, "is taking over in the lab as a model of human
genetics."

    The Jackson Laboratory is the world's most diverse "mouse ranch." It
maintains 2,500 strains of mice for sale, of which 33 are produced in large
quantities. (Conveniently, mice reproduce once every three months.) Twenty- five
million mice are bred every year for lab research - twice as many as in 1990.

    "The mouse-wrangling business is booming," says Luther Young, a Jackson
official, using another term from the horse trade. Although Jackson, which had
$59 million (U.S.) in revenues last year, is a non-profit institution, the
over-all mouse industry is a $200 million affair.

    The mouse industry's astonishing growth has been accompanied by controversy.
For rather arbitrary reasons, the Department of Agriculture has long exempted
mice from the provisions of the 1966 Animal Welfare Act, which established
standards of care for lab animals. This loophole, critics say, has made it
possible for scientists to manipulate mice in vast numbers, cruelly or
otherwise.

    Curiously, the act contains a category known as Other Animals, which
includes ferrets, armadillos, spotted hyenas, chinchillas and woodchucks, but
not the common mouse. The USDA's lab-animal census therefore counts only 1.2
million animals in American institutions, whereas the real total is probably
closer to 50 million. And almost all of them are mice.

    Today's frenzied market for mice - thousands of varieties with prices that
can't be beat! - might well change as a result of a lawsuit brought by animal
rights groups determined to bring mice under the umbrella of the 1966 law.

    Last month, the U.S. District Court in Washington ruled for the Alternatives
Research and Development Foundation in its suit against the Department of
Agriculture. If the government does not file an appeal, the cost of caring for
mice could rise by 30 per cent.

    Such a development could put the brakes on the mouse industry. Some critics
would welcome just that. John McArdle, director of the group that brought the
lawsuit, says: "I'm sure Jackson has high standards but it's the scale of the
thing that creeps me out. Overall, the mouse industry is a lucrative fad, driven
by money and by corporate greed."

    Carol Bult, a scientist at Jackson who specializes in turning genetic
research into databases, disagrees. Experiments on mutant mice, she argues, "
will yield an immense number of gene targets for pharmaceutical companies."

    Indeed, criticism of the mouse-wrangling industry profoundly irritates most
scientists, including Davisson. "Our mice may be bored," she says, rolling her
eyes, "but mistreated? Look around you."

    The room is indeed spotlessly clean and calm. There is barely a sound from
the 34,000 inmates - a solitary squeak here and there. (The room gets noisy at
night, I'm told, when the lights are shut off and the nocturnal creatures perk
up.)

    We dip into the next plastic container. Inside are two albino mice with
fragile pink eyes. As soon as the roof of their little world is lifted they
begin jerking their heads upward, tilting their ears from side to side and
sniffing. Davisson explains that these strains have an inborn defect of the
inner ear that unbalances them and causes them to cock their heads skyward
continually. The researchers, rather poetically, call them Stargazers.

    A few containers down, another white specimen scoots around his pine
shavings in a relentless figure-8 pattern. He is known as a Waltzer. Below him,
a black mouse bangs his head against the plastic repetitively. This is a Punk
Rocker. And there are more, usually bearing names that express their genetic
dysfunction: Fidget, Fat, Shiver and so on.

    For centuries, people have bred mutant mice. The ancient Cretans admired
albinos and occasionally had them nest in their temples. Waltzers were cherished
by the ancient Chinese. In the West, eccentric "mouse fanciers" began keeping
mutants as pets in the 19th century. These hobbyists caught the attention of
scientists, who wondered if they might have more serious uses. In 1909, a young
Harvard researcher named Clarence Cook Little started up his own mouse colony.
Fascinated by inherited mutations among rodents, he became convinced that they
might offer a way to understand a genetic basis for cancer in humans.

    That year, Little developed the first inbred mouse strain by mating brothers
and sisters. These inbreds did not have the mixed-coloured pelts of wild mice;
their consistently brown pelts betrayed their artificiality. In 1921, scientists
used some of Little's mice to create a tumour-prone creature called the "A
strain." The era of the laboratory mouse was underway.

    In 1929, Little founded the Jackson Laboratory. Cancer became the ranch's
principal focus. In an early experiment, females that were highly susceptible to
mammary tumours were crossbred with healthy strains to trace the tumour
inheritance in the offspring. At the same time as it began pioneering the
genetics of cancer, Jackson also began selling mice. By 1945, about 9,000 Swiss
white mice were being shipped out every week at 20 cents apiece. Last year,
Jackson shipped 1.7 million mice to 12,000 labs worldwide.


    As I walk through the lab's sunny upstairs corridors, where a mouse is never
seen except on a poster, I'm surprised at how airy and optimistically healthy it
feels. The wood-finished walls are covered with cute prints of mice in idyllic
settings. There is an adorable Mus musculus crawling ecstatically over a chunk
of Gouda instead of languishing inside a Tupperware-like box. There is a
Meriones americanus, or jumping mouse, frolicking among stalks of maize. Another
poster shows a small girl in a hospital bed holding a teddy bear. "It's the
animals you don't see," it says, "that really helped her recover."

    In the library, I meet Ken Paigen, Jackson's director. Here there are glass
sculptures of mice as well as Hopi kachina dolls of mice and a bizarre print
showing quill-wielding mice labouring over Japanese calligraphy. It's a
veritable shrine. "Lovely, aren't they?" Paigen murmurs. "They're fascinating
animals, really."

    Paigen is a former Berkeley genetics professor who came to Bar Harbor in
1989.  "What we're doing here is mapping out the underlying reasons why you and
I get sick," he says. "We're investigating the genetic pathways of illness,
unravelling the mysteries of the gene." Every disease, he points out, has
susceptible and resistant strains. "Why are there different outcomes in
different mice with the same disease? Because of their genes. We're out to find
these modifying genes."

    Each human, Paigen explains, has up to 100,000 different proteins in his or
her body. Most current medicines target only about 400 of them and work
according to inadequately blunt statistical averages. "Imagine a medicine
tailored to an individual's precise genetic makeup," he says, eyes twinkling.
"We could invent a whole new medicine! It's definitely the medicine of the 21st
century. And the mouse is the key."

    But why not the woodchuck or some higher mammal? For one thing, mice have a
long history in science; researchers know a great deal about them. "And then,"
he continues, "they breed so quickly that we can study three generations or more
a year. That's vital when you're studying inheritance." He pauses and twiddles
his thumbs. "They're also extremely cheap."

    Jackson's 33 staff scientists work on everything from diabetes to lupus. For
some maladies, an appropriate model mouse already exists in nature. (Blind mice,
after all, aren't just found in nursery rhymes.) But to create model mice for
many human diseases, healthy mice must be injected with potent drugs - hormones,
viruses, antibiotics - that cause novel mutations. Such trickery is growing ever
more sophisticated. "Nowadays, we can even transfer genes across species,"
Paigen says.


    Barbara Knowles, associate director of the lab, breeds cancerous tumours in
her Black 6 mice. ("A nice, docile mouse," she says. "Good breeder.") To
engineer her mutants, she injects embryos with a lethal monkey virus, Simian
Virus 40. It triggers cancerous tumours almost identical to those in humans.

    "We're on the verge of understanding how tumours arise," she says. "The
thing is, these tumours will not grow in normal B6's. So we know that the B6 has
a genetic defence against them."

    By planting the tumour into the B6, then breeding it with normal members of
its own strain, Knowles can observe how the propensity to grow or not grow
tumours is transmitted by genes: over 10 or so generations, a revealing pattern
of resistance and nonresistance will emerge.

    "A mouse reaches sexual maturity in six weeks," Knowles says as she shows me
gently around her lab. "Obviously, that makes it the ideal testing ground for
genetic pathways."

    Of course, none of this radiant scientific serenity cuts much ice with
animal rights advocates.

    "These are Frankenstein mice, pure and simple," says Dean Smith of the
American Anti-Vivisection Society outside Philadelphia. "These animals are being
programmed to die of cancer! It's horrendous. Basically, they're cheap and
there's no federal regulation covering them. You can do whatever you want with
them."

    Smith adamantly insists, moreover, that computer simulations and models can
replace animals one day.

    "Besides," he adds, echoing a familiar refrain of animal rights advocates, "
the health benefits of using mice are exaggerated."

    "From my perspective, it's simple," Ken Paigen says. "It's mice or us,
basically. All modern medicine is based on animal experimentation. Computer
models are definitely inadequate."

    Harold Varmus, president of the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Centre in
New York, is also not impressed by the utopian possibility of dispensing with
lab mice.

    He admits, though, that gene experimentation will not yield wonder medicines
straight away.

    "Is the mouse oversold?" he says.

    "Sometimes. But where's the exact line between pure research and medicine
development? Actually, the whole trajectory of cancer research is now away from
cultures in the petri dish toward what happens inside the live animal. Mouse and
human genetics aren't a perfect match but they're close enough. It's a proven
tool of huge value."

    NEW YORK TIMES MAGAZINE


LOAD-DATE: August 11, 2000


                              447 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                       July 27, 2000, Thursday, Edition 1

SECTION: LIFE

LENGTH: 1434 words

HEADLINE: IS THERE

BODY:



    PHOTOGRAPHY BY VINCE TALOTTA/TORONTO STAR

    Stylish Marilyn Monroe, above, in 1956. At right, Toronto
 wardrobe consultant Angela Koszuta in denim jacket with Sample
 sweater and skirt.

    a style gene?

    Some people are born stylish while others pay top dollar and still look
unremarkable


    David Graham Back in Hollywood's glory days the studio stars were as famous
 for their red carpet meanders as they were for their screen
performances.

    Katharine Hepburn, Cary Grant and Marilyn Monroe were envied by common folk
for their stand-out sense of style.

    But with modern day celebrities such as Jennifer Aniston, Jennifer Lopez and
Drew Barrymore, it's difficult to know who actually has the remarkable style,
the star or the hired hands they've employed to make it all happen.

    So what is style anyway? And why do some people have it in spades while
others are so lacking.

    While some men and women invest small fortunes in their wardrobes, they
often still look rather unremarkable. Yet when you've got it, style can be
achieved inexpensively and seemingly without effort.

    Style, it seems, is a separate category from fashion and taste. Style is
elusive and innate, explains Holt Renfrew fashion director Barbara Atkin. "It
crosses all social boundaries. It's all about being authentic, true to
yourself."

    Style requires skill, experience and even courage, she adds.

    Fashion is "of the moment," she says. "It's items."

    Taste has a reputation for being elitist and with enough effort it can be
easily developed. In the long run, both fashion and taste can be learned and
bought.

    Other fashion insiders are taking a scientific approach and suggest that
perhaps there may be a style gene involved. This, they assert, would explain why
the gentleman in the bad suit simply never learns. Blame it on his defective
style gene.

    In her book, A Dedicated Follower Of Fashion (Phaidon), respected fashion
writer and consultant Holly Brubach ponders the possibilities of such a style
gene in a mock news story that originally appeared as a column in The New York
Times magazine in 1995. In the essay she announced that a "style gene" had been
isolated and that a therapy had been discovered for men and women who were style
challenged. (Her fictitious experimental procedure took place at (NICE), the
National Institute for Corrective Elegance.)

    Until the discovery of the style gene, traditional therapies, which focused
on improving the patient's taste by means of supervised shopping, nearly always
failed, kidded Brubach. But when healthy style genes were injected into the
patients, the results were overwhelming.

    Gene therapy, she supposed, would offer hope to the hopeless.

    "One of the men, whom the study identifies as a laughingstock since
childhood, has overhauled his wardrobe and shows no signs of remission. The
other, notorious for wearing 'the worst ties on the planet' is now a wardrobe
consultant to rock stars. The woman, whom scientists classified as 'mousy' at
the study's inception, has since manifested proficiency in tying a scarf 12
ways."

    Five year's later, Brubach's tongue-in-cheek column seems prophetic.

    "There is an enormous genetic component to style," believes Toronto cosmetic
plastic surgeon Dr. Stephen Mulholland of the SpaMedica clinic.

    He defines style as "a subconscious and conscious neural process" but says
it would be naive to think there is a single style gene. However, he's convinced
it would be equally naive to believe that the human DNA molecule does not
contribute significantly to a person's sense of style. While he doesn't buy the
single gene theory, Mulholland says there is probably "a constellation of genes
which modify our ability to form, interpret and synthesize colours, shapes and
textures into aesthetically pleasing configurations and tapestries. "

    "We've known for a long time that the left hemisphere of the brain is
responsible for such things as abstraction, spatial relationships, proportion
and colour co-ordination," says Mulholland, adding, "people with style often
live in the left side of their brain."

    Mulholland is excited by recent scientific discoveries. "In the past three
months we've come to know all the code to the human DNA molecule, the genome,"
he says. It opens up a whole new world of genetic research into processes that
control our aging, illnesses and even our thought processes.

    "It will be a huge area of experimentation over the next 50 years," he says.

    Mulholland explains it this way. "Now we understand the sequence of letters
in our genetic alphabet. A number of these letters strung together constitute a
gene. It's the genes or sequences of genes that produce proteins such as the
neural chemical transmitters and nerve structures which are responsible for the
formation of thoughts, including our sense of style."

    He also suggests that people, who already have a genetic predisposition
toward style and are brought up in a home that embraces style, are more inclined
to be artistically daring and successful.

    By the same token, he says, if you're not "hard wired" with style, if you
don't have the genetic foundations for aesthetic creativity - "copy someone who
does."

    By anyone's standards Toronto's Angela Koszuta, a wardrobe consultant for
film and commercials, has style. But she doesn't think it's in her genes.

    Recently when she entered a Holt Renfrew soiree wearing an unusual
combination of champagne-coloured python jeans, a burgundy lace slip by Toronto
designer Lida Baday and a shrunken jean jacket, one of the store's
vice-presidents, Jacqui Simpson, commented, with a note of praise, "Now, that's
style."

    To the ear the three elements, snakeskin, lace and denim, might sound
jarring.  But as it was executed, it worked - even to the critical eye of a Holt
Renfrew executive.

    Koszuta says she came by her style the hard way.

    Raised by a single mother her teenage years were modest. There were no big
budgets for wardrobes in her family. "We lived on very little money and my
mother was not that interested in fashion. I used to go to the Goodwill and buy
the most outrageous clothes I could find just to get attention. My logic was all
wrong. I looked ridiculous. It would have been smarter for me to buy a nice pair
of jeans and a few white T-shirts."

    Koszuta discounts the notion of a style gene. Rather, she credits a set of
circumstances that have conspired to spark an early interest in making herself
appear stylish.

    She wanted to conceal her impoverished roots so she often erred on the side
of showy. She also craved attention, the main reason for the jeans and T- shirt
route, though perhaps smarter, was not going to give her what she wanted. And
from the beginning she had to achieve it all with very little money. And even
though she now earns top dollar as a wardrobe consultant, Koszuta still loves a
bargain and she's thrilled to combine a Yohji Yamamoto dress with dime store
flip-flops.

    Suzanne Boyd, editor-in-chief of Flare magazine, appreciates the differences
between fashion, taste and style.

    "Fashion provides the tools for people with taste and style," she says.
According to Boyd, you can use fashion to help you create your own style, which
can be an indicator of whether or not you have taste.

    She agrees that style is elusive. "You can't bottle it, buy it or explain
it," she says.

    Boyd also believes style involves a search that often begins in youth.

    Sometimes the search starts with the street culture or a nightclub culture
and it ends up displaying itself in the way you dress. Sometimes personal style
is the result of denial. Some people want to forget their background. Others
simply don't like the way they look so they develop a strong sense of style to
draw attention away from their appearance.

    "Look at (Italian Vogue's) Anna Piaggi or (the late Vogue editor) Diana
Vreeland. These women knew they were not beauties so they worked to develop a
style," she says.

    Now the style of celebrities is credited to the professional stylists who
create their looks for them. Boyd says she can spot a fraud from a thousand
paces. "Let me see them walk in the shoes. I can tell immediately if they put
their own look together."

    For Boyd, it's Stella McCartney, Charlize Theron, Kate Moss and Jade Jagger
who display an unassailable sense of style mostly because of who they are.

    "Their style is so 'on' you wouldn't dare question it," she says. If they
are wearing it, it's right. Don't even ask if it's in their genes.


LOAD-DATE: July 27, 2000


                              455 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Sun Media Corporation
                      London Free Press (Ontario, Canada)

                     July 1, 2000, Saturday, Final EDITION

SECTION: FORUM, Pg. F5

LENGTH: 1125 words

HEADLINE: WHERE GENOME MAP MAY LEAD CHIEF RESEARCHER PREDICTS ITS USES AND WARNS
AGAINST MISUSES

BYLINE: DR. LAWRENCE K. ALTMAN, NEW YORK TIMES NEWS SERVICE

BODY:


   Within 10 years, tests for genetic predisposition to 25 major causes of
illness and death in this country will be widely available if predictions of Dr.
Francis S. Collins, head of the Human Genome Project of the National Institutes
of Health, prove correct.

   But most people will shun genetic testing unless effective therapies exist to
prevent potential hazards from the particular disorders, Collins said in an
interview.

   The project will map each of the estimated 50,000 human genes and spell out
each letter in the book of the DNA, the thread of life, in the genes. But as
scientists race to write the final chapter, they have little comprehension of
the book's instructions and the changes they might bring to society.

   Nevertheless, in a recent lecture after receiving a prestigious award from
the Association of American Physicians, Collins made predictions about the
project's impact on medical practice over the next 40 years, answering the
question he said he was asked most: where will all the research lead? In doing
so, he plunged into territory where few other scientific leaders tread.

   Using genetics to tailor and improve health care will be the genome project's
main legacy if effective laws are passed to protect privacy, prevent use of
genetic information to deprive an individual of health insurance or a job and
prohibit other forms of genetic discrimination, Collins said.

   Also, he urged closer scrutiny to determine when genetic tests are ready for
wide use, given that commercial pressures may persuade patients and doctors to
use tests before their medical value is established.

   Even if only a few predictions prove true, major political and economic
problems would follow. For example, the new genetic information's power to
change medical practice could aggravate international tensions by widening
inequalities in access to health care within countries and between those in the
developed and third worlds.

   Among Collins' predictions: By 2010, the genome will help identify people at
highest risk of particular diseases, so monitoring efforts can focus on them.

   A disorder of iron metabolism is likely to become the model for such
screening. The condition, hemachromatosis, affects one in 300 people and in the
early stages often goes undetected, which is unfortunate because simple
treatments, like periodic blood-letting to remove excess iron, can prevent
complications like cirrhosis. By 2010, studies will have found the most
effective combination of biochemical and genetic tests to detect people who are
susceptible.

   In cancer, genetic tests will identify those at highest risk for lung cancer
from smoking. Genetic tests for colon cancer will narrow colonoscopy screening
to people who need it most. A genetic test for prostate cancer could lead to
more precise use of the prostate specific antigen, or PSA, test by identifying
those men in whom the cancer is most likely to progress fastest. Additional
genetic tests would guide treatment of breast and ovarian cancer.

   Three or four genetic tests will help predict an individual's risk for
developing coronary artery disease, thus helping to determine when to start
drugs and other measures to reduce the need for bypass operations.

   Tests predicting a high risk for diabetes should help encourage susceptible
individuals to exercise and control their weight. Those at higher risk might
start taking drugs before they develop symptoms.

   Scientists have a partial insight into the genetics of osteoporosis. With
further research, Collins said, "you could imagine combining that kind of a test
with a decision to start calcium and vitamin D therapy early on to try to
prevent bone loss before it is clinically apparent, although we don't yet have
evidence" that such therapy will benefit individuals at high risk for
osteoporosis.

   Tests to detect many potential problems will be performed before birth, or
even as part of in-vitro fertilization before an embryo is implanted in the
womb. These tests will raise troubling issues: The technology is prone to error
and, at least initially, the tests will be hard to get and expensive.

   As the accuracy improves and costs drop, many will demand the tests to reduce
the chances of bearing a child who is at risk of developing conditions that are
not actually debilitating, but just "undesirable." If so, there will be debates
about the morality.

   The explosion of information about the new genetics will create a huge
problem in health education. "Most physicians in practice have had not a single
hour of education in genetics and are going to be severely challenged to pick up
this new technology and run with it," Collins said.

   More than 120 medical and nursing societies representing virtually every
specialty have formed a coalition to develop an educational program combining
the Internet and traditional courses. "They all recognize this train is coming,"
Collins said.

   By 2020, doctors will rely on individual genetic variations in prescribing
new and old drugs and choosing the dose.

   Pharmaceutical companies will take a second look at some drugs that were
never marketed, or were taken off the market, because some people who took them
suffered adverse reactions. It will take many years to develop such drugs and
tests.

   Cancer doctors will use drugs that precisely target a tumour's molecular
fingerprint. One such gene-based designer drug, Herceptin, is already marketed
for treating advanced breast cancer.

   The genome project holds promise for the mental health field. "One of the
greatest benefits of genomic medicine will be to unravel some biological
contributions to major mental illnesses like schizophrenia and manic depressive
disease" and produce new therapies, Collins said.

   By 2030, death will still be inevitable, but clinical trials relying on
information from the genome will be under way to extend human lifespans. Human
genes like those involved in the aging of flies, worms and mice will be
identified and fully catalogued.

   Scientists working with the genome will develop full computer models of human
cells and analyze all human genes, proteins and their interactions. As a result,
many experiments now done with laboratory animals or even human subjects will be
completed entirely on computers. Collins said that if he were now a graduate
student, he would join this field.

   Groups opposed to technology will be alarmed by these developments and will
act to halt them. "We have to be prepared for that," Collins said.

   By 2040, gene therapy and gene-based drugs will be available for most
diseases. Using information derived from the genes for aging, the average human
life span will reach 90 in the year when Collins would reach that age.

NOTES:
Dr. Lawrence K. Altman is a correspondent for Science Times. Distributedby New
York Times News Service.

LOAD-DATE: July 2, 2000


                              459 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Sun Media Corporation
                      London Free Press (Ontario, Canada)

                     June 27, 2000, Tuesday, Final EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. A13

LENGTH: 551 words

HEADLINE: GENETIC BREAKTHROUGH RAISES ETHICAL QUESTIONS

BYLINE: FREE PRESS NEWS SERVICES

DATELINE: LONDON

BODY:


   Scientists heralded a brave new world yesterday but skeptics said a genetic
breakthrough could usher in a sinister era of perfect people and death to the
disabled.

   "The further science goes, the further the worst-case scenario goes," said
Steve Jenkins, a spokesperson for the Church of England. "I'm not anti- science
but there is no way that God is now out of a job."

   He spoke after an international team of researchers said they have mapped 97
per cent of the human genome -- the genetic makeup of the human body -- in a
scientific accomplishment on a par with the discovery of penicillin or the lunar
landing.

   "This is the outstanding achievement not only of our lifetime but in terms of
human history," said Dr. Michael Dexter, whose Wellcome Trust funded the British
arm of the project.

   Carried out in 16 centres around the world, the researchers have whittled
down the human body to a complex string of letters that should revolutionize the
way doctors see the body and treat its shortfalls.

   The potential benefits are huge: drugs tailor-made for individuals,
predictive testing, improved understanding of disease, along with gene therapy
to put in-built wrongs to right.

   "It's the difference between using genetics to correct something that has
gone wrong and using them to create something considered perfect," said Jenkins,
who trained in science.

   "The idea of designing humans from scratch along with the prospect of an
enormous increase in abortion is not the world we want."

   Others fear the possible misuse of science in the drive to create a perfect
world and say few will benefit. People are already expressing their concerns.

   A Time/CNN poll in this week's Time found that 75 per cent of 1,218 surveyed
Americans do not want insurance companies to know their genetic code.

   Eighty-four per cent don't want the government to know.

   For their own personal use, though, 61 per cent of those polled want to know
if they are genetically predisposed to disease and 67 per cent want to share
their genetic code with their doctors.

   While the scientists emphasized their so-called "book of life" is just the
beginning of a long road ahead, doubters said it would benefit few and could
turn out to be a giant step back to the sort of eugenics practised in Nazi
Germany.

   "Mapping the human genome is a great human achievement," said Richard
Nicholson, editor of the Bulletin of Medical Ethics.

   "Like climbing Mount Everest, it will benefit few people, leaving most
untouched. But unlike climbing Mount Everest, it has the potential to damage
large numbers of people."

   Designer babies could be created, flawed fetuses killed. The stigma of being
anything less than perfect could soar.

   "Disabled people feel a responsibility to raise the alarm," said Agnes
Fletcher of the Royal Association for Disability and Rehabilitation. "New hope
for disabled people is accompanied by the danger of disabled people and others
experiencing increased discrimination in employment, insurance, health-care
provision and education."

   Yet scientists say they are a long way from making sense of their new
alphabet soup and putting it to practical use.

   They point out that the anatomy of the heart was worked out in 1543, while
the first heart transplant did not come until 1967.

LOAD-DATE: June 27, 2000


                              464 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                       June 8, 2000, Thursday, Edition 1

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 310 words

HEADLINE: WELCOME TRANSFUSION

BODY:



    The new McLaughlin Centre at the University of Toronto will be a stunning
addition to this city, the province and the country.

    With $150 million to generate income, the centre should quickly become a
magnet for top scientists in the exploding field of biomedical and genetic
research.

    The money comes from the R. Samuel McLaughlin Foundation - he built Canada's
first assembly line cars - from the province's Innovation Trust, and from the
university and its four teaching hospital affiliates.

    And though not much was made of it in the announcement, it's likely to
attract a great deal more funding from drug companies anxious to convert new
research into new, profitable drugs. As the still-festering controversy
involving the pharmaceutical company Apotex, the Hospital for Sick Children and
Dr. Nancy Olivieri has made clear, this is not always an unalloyed benefit.

    Nonetheless, this new centre will move the province to the fore along a
whole range of medical frontiers - from gene therapies to the development of new
synthetic ''biomaterials."

    It will also transform the way medical school students are taught at
University of Toronto medical school.

    Premier Mike Harris assumed credit for what he called the ''beginning of a
new era of medicine in Canada." And certainly credit is due the government for
its role.

    Unfortunately, Harris then linked the new centre to ''our own aggressive
health-care reforms."

    Unfortunate, because his aggression hasn't extended to adding new spaces at
U of T and other medical schools, nor to funding a needed expansion of U of T's
nursing program.

    So we may well gain some of the best medical researchers in the world. But
will patients be any better off if we don't have enough doctors and nurses to
provide the timely care that is the most urgent need in our health system?


LOAD-DATE: June 8, 2000


                              466 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Sun Media Corporation
                      London Free Press (Ontario, Canada)

                      June 6, 2000, Tuesday, Final EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. A9, CANADA DIGEST

LENGTH: 95 words

HEADLINE: U OF T TO GET NEW CENTRE

BYLINE: FREE PRESS NEWS SERVICES

DATELINE: TORONTO

BODY:


   The Ontario government is providing $ 50 million to help create a
state-of-the-art centre for biomedical and genetic research at the University of
Toronto. The $ 150-million project is also being funded by donations from the
McLaughlin Foundation, the university and four of the university's affiliated
hospitals, Premier Mike Harris said. The Samuel McLaughlin Centre will
specialize in research in molecular epidemiology, gene therapy, molecular
pharmacology and tissue engineering."This is the beginning of a new era of
medicine in Canada," Harris said.

LOAD-DATE: June 6, 2000


                              467 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                        June 6, 2000, Tuesday, Edition 1

SECTION: LIFE

LENGTH: 1110 words

HEADLINE: DO SWEAT IT!!!

BYLINE: Sharlene Azam

BODY:

    trying to hide it?

    The first time was in high school. I was standing outside in the blazing sun
with some of the older girls when I smelled it. It was wonderful and I inhaled
deeply.

    I didn't know that baby powder scent was from her deodorant when I
complimented her on her excellent perfume. Yeah, I felt stupid when the other
girls snickered and gave each other that look, but I was still impressed.

    The fact that this sweaty girl was wearing deodorant meant she was an adult,
something my friends and I were desperate to become.

    Being physically mature enough to require deodorant was a monumental step
out of childhood for us. When you turned 13, the hope was that your mom would
leave a little five pack of pink razors on your dresser and a stick of
deodorant. In fact, we were so preoccupied with embracing any of the symbols of
adulthood, we didn't stop to consider if there really was anything to shave off
our legs, or an odour under our arms to mask. We simply wanted to sweat; to be
able to use products reserved for adults.

    We wanted to sweat even though we knew sweating was for horses, for people
who laboured, for people who lost their cool. Besides, appearing coolheaded, in
control and confident - the things commercials said we needed to be and could be
with a little swipe of deodorant under our arms - all required sweating.

    We didn't know there would come a day when how much we sweat would determine
the clothes we could buy. We didn't fully realize the negative attitude toward
sweating would make us want to clog our pores with chemicals.

    Aluminum is the agent in antiperspirants that stops you from sweating by
shrinking the sweat glands. While effective, studies have shown a link between
aluminum in the body and Alzheimer's disease.

    ''There's a lot of talk about aluminum and Alzheimer's but the quantity in
antiperspirants is very low and there is no one single known cause for
Alzheimer's," says Stefani Valkonen, public affairs official at Proctor &
Gamble.

    A lot of people know about the connection between aluminum and Alzheimer's
and possibly even breast cancer, but with sales of antiperspirants and
deodorants reaching $106 million in 1998 (according to the Canadian Cosmetic,
Toiletry and Fragrance Association), it matters not.

    It's more important to ''never let 'em see you sweat." Why do we hate to
sweat when sweating is natural and necessary to cool the body? Why is sweating
so embarrassing when the smell it produces is often indicative of the health
you're in.

    Dr. Richard Power, a clinical nutritionist in Bethesda, Md., says in a 1996
issue of Health Quest magazine: ''A person who bathes regularly but smells as if
they haven't washed at all could have a zinc deficiency."

    Practitioners of Chinese medicine quoted in the same article say they use
smell as a signal to determine a patient's wellness or illness. ''Putrid odours
indicate kidney/bladder imbalances, while rancid odours indicate liver/small
intestine imbalances."

    I guess we hate sweating because it's a bodily function and no one wants to
see that. Plus, it's assumed if you're sweaty you must also be smelly.

    North Americans are much more concerned about smell than Europeans, but
people all over go to unhealthy lengths to cover up underarm funk, sometimes
with dire consequences. Two years ago a Belfast teen died from deodorant fumes.
Apparently, to smell extra fresh, the young man would cover his entire body in
deodorant twice daily. He was found to have 10 times the lethal dosage of
propane and butanein his blood.

    If you want to avoid some of the ingredients in deodorants like butylene
glycol and benzoate glycene check the variety of products at health food stores.

    The paranoia around visible sweat is difficult to understand.

    Perhaps our disdain for sweat speaks to a class issue. Wealthy people don't
exert themselves, so they don't sweat. Other people do it for them.

    Women and girls, it seems, don't like to sweat because it shows exertion and
that is decidedly unfeminine. It's okay for women to glow a little, but sweating
is out.

    Fear of sweating is one of the main reasons among high school girls for
dropping gym. Ironically, the girls who sit on the sidelines might be better
served sweating it out on the court.

    The Human Gene Therapy Research Institute in Des Moines, Iowa, reports that
sweat is ''99 per cent water, but also contains lactic acid and urea, which are
such good moisturizers they are used in cosmetics."

    Our outdated attitudes toward sweating might be related to the fact that its
portrayal hasn't changed much on television over the years.

    Sweat is still unattractive. Neither Marianne nor Ginger ever broke a sweat
and they were trapped in the tropics on Gilligan's Island. On an episode of Ally
McBeal, no one wants to stand next to the guy who sweats. The fat cop on NYPD
Blue sweats and it's nasty.

    At rock concerts, photographers are herded from the stage after the first
two songs to prevent close-ups that might show the singer in a sweat. The only
people on whom sweat is acceptable and even desirable are athletes.

    Here's the problem, though: Like athletes, we all have somewhere between 2
and 4 million sweat glands covering every square inch of our bodies, except for
our lips. And, if you're like me every single one of those glands works.

    They don't just work when I'm in the gym where it's okay to sweat, thanks to
the fitness revolution. They work and betray me at times when I wish they would
just cool it.

    Of course, I don't have it that bad. Some people suffer from hyperhydrosis,
a condition that results in excessive sweating. People who have this problem can
sweat so profusely they need to carry extra clothes with them to change into
when soaked. One of the measures used to help with over drip includes
injections, around the armpits and palms, of a remedy made from the botulism
toxin. The most severe of sufferers can have the nerves cut that connect to the
sweat glands in the armpits or palms.

    Some people take their own drastic measures to stop sweating. According to
the L.A. Times: ''Richard Nixon lost his 1960 presidential bid partly because he
dripped profusely during a televised debate with John F. Kennedy and so applied
antiperspirants to his face for subsequent appearances."

    Even though we'd rather not see or smell our own sweat or anyone else's,
after a long, hard workout or gruelling tennis match, nothing is better than
being drenched. Not smelly, just wet like one of the athletes in the Gatorade
commercials where the sweat drips off in pretty colours.


GRAPHIC:  A REAL DRIP:
 It's okay for athletes to sweat, but the rest of us try to keep our cool on a
daily basis.

LOAD-DATE: June 6, 2000


                              468 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                        June 6, 2000, Tuesday, Edition 1

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 590 words

HEADLINE: $150 MILLION SET ASIDE FOR RESEARCH

BYLINE: Rita Daly

BODY:



    HEALTH REPORTER Ontario is set to recruit the world's top scientists with
the
 creation of a unique centre for biomedical and genetic research.

    ''Now the world's best and brightest medical minds will be coming to Canada,
" Premier Mike Harris said at yesterday's announcement at the University of
Toronto.

    The centre will be called the R. Samuel McLaughlin Centre, named after the
late pioneering automaker whose charitable foundation is donating $50 million
when it winds up its 50-year lifespan next year.

    Ironically, the centre will reverse the years-long process set up by
McLaughlin when he funded more than 1,000 fellowships for Canadian medical
students to go abroad and learn the latest in their field.

    A total of $150 million will go to establish the Toronto-based centre, which
will operate on five sites.

    They will include the university and its four teaching and research
partners: the Hospital for Sick Children, the University Health Network (which
includes the Toronto General, Toronto Western and Princess Margaret hospitals),
Mount Sinai Hospital and Sunnybrook and Women's College Health Sciences Centre.

    The foundation's donation is being matched with a $50 million grant from the
provincial government's Ontario Innovation Trust, which will pay for the
centre's labs, supplies and advanced equipment.

    Another $50 million will be donated by the University of Toronto and its
four medical partners.

    Dr. James Woodgett, a senior cancer biologist at Princess Margaret Hospital,
praised the announcement for ensuring young talented minds remain in the
country.

    ''We have excellent students and fellows that we train here and who often
move to the States because they feel Canada can't compete. That excuse has
really gone out the window with this sort of initiative."

    As many as 300 to 400 graduates, post-doctorates and independent scientists
are expected to carry out research over the initial five-year period once the
centre opens in August, 2001, said Dr. Calvin Stiller, vice-chair of the Ontario
Innovation Trust and a heart transplant physician.

    The centre will focus on five key areas of research: multiple gene defects,
cause of the most common forms of disease such as diabetes and cancer;
environmental influences on predisposed genetic diseases such as colon and
breast cancer; gene therapy; molecular pharmacology; and biomaterials and tissue
engineering.

    Dr. David Naylor, U of T's dean of medicine, said the fight against diseases
such as arthritis, which takes a huge toll on Canadians, will benefit from the
research ventures.

    Calling it a new era in medical research, Harris said the McLaughlin Centre
will provide a world-class location for excellence in molecular medicine and
gene therapy. ''Now the McLaughlin Centre will have the ability and facilities
to train the next generation of outstanding Canadian doctors and medical
researchers here," the Premier said.

    With a recent Statistics Canada report showing more medical doctors leaving
Canada than entering it, U of T president Robert Prichard said this announcement
places the university on a level playing field in its competition for leading
researchers. ''This grant will allow us to attract and retain scientists who
will rank with the very best in the world," he said.

    ''We believe we've assembled the base of resources necessary to launch
ourselves in the absolute top ranking centres of biomedical research anywhere in
the world."

    David Crane's view, C2


GRAPHIC: RENE JOHNSTON/TORONTO STAR
 TOP OF THE WORLD:
 Premier Mike Harris praised the plan at the University of Toronto news
conference yesterday.

LOAD-DATE: June 6, 2000


                              469 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                       June 1, 2000, Thursday, Edition 1

SECTION: BUSINESS

LENGTH: 489 words

HEADLINE: 2 BIOTECH FIRMS IN COURT ON CRUCIAL PATENT SUIT

BODY:



    Case could affect billions of drug-sale dollars


    Christopher Noble

    BOSTON - Biotechnology firms Amgen Inc. and Transkaryotic Therapies Inc.
square off today in a U.S. District court in a patent case that could have
far-reaching implications for the volatile, fast-growing industry.

    At issue are claims that Transkaryotic, also known as TKT, and Franco-German
pharmaceutical giant Aventis have violated Amgen's patents for the anemia-
fighting drug Epogen.

    The suit could affect billions of dollars of drug sales, the future of
Amgen's best-selling product and possibly the very survival of two of the
companies.

    Epogen generated about $1.8 billion (U.S.) in sales for Amgen in 1999 and
worldwide revenues were some $4 billion including sales through Amgen licensing
partner Johnson & Johnson Co.

    Neither company is commenting, but the result of the case is crucial for the
wider biotechnology industry because of the central role of strong patents in a
business where control of products and how they are made is the only way to earn
back the sometimes staggeringly high costs of drug development and ensure future
investment for new products.

    ''Patents are fundamental," said Elizabeth Weiswasser, a lawyer with Weil,
Gotschal & Manges. ''We are involved in a lot of deals in this industry and what
you really see them turning on is intellectual property."

    Amgen has claimed a patent on the production in all vertebrates of
erythropoietin, a substance that boosts the number of red blood cells in the
blood and is used to combat anemia in patients undergoing kidney dialysis.

    Amgen makes Epogen, its version of the substance, by inserting a human gene
into hamster cells, which then produce the protein.

    Transkaryotic, which wants to market its own version of the drug, called GA-
EPO, makes the substance without animals by inserting a promoter into human
genes, which then stimulates human cells to produce the substance.

    Amgen wants the judge to rule that TKT has violated the patent simply by
using cells from a vertebrate life form - in this case humans - to make
substance. TKT hopes to prove the patent is too broad and unenforceable.

    ''They are trying to keep a patent on the production of erythropoietin in
all vertebrates, which is a very broad interpretation," said Donna Gitter, a
professor in biotechnology patent law at Fordham University Schools of Business
in New York.

    ''The question is whetherAmgenis interpreting its patent as too broad, and
that can have important implications. If the patent is interpreted too broadly,
start-up companies could have a hard time getting going."

    Such a result would be contrary to the spirit, if not the letter, of U.S.
patent law, which aims to spur innovation by giving inventors a chance to recoup
the cost of developing new products, Gitter said.

    Judge William Young is trying the case without a jury.



LOAD-DATE: June 1, 2000


                              473 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                        May 15, 2000, Monday, Edition 1

SECTION: BUSINESS

LENGTH: 487 words

HEADLINE: 2 BIOTECH FIRMS IN COURT ON CRUCIAL SUIT

BYLINE: Christopher Noble

BODY:





    REUTERS NEWS AGENCY

    BOSTON - Biotechnology firms Amgen Inc. and Transkaryotic Therapies Inc.
square off today in a U.S. District court in a patent case that could have
far-reaching implications for the volatile, fast-growing industry.

    At issue are claims that Transkaryotic, also known as TKT, and Franco-
German pharmaceutical giant Aventis have violated Amgen's patents for the
anemia-fighting drug Epogen. The suit could affect billions of dollars of drug
sales, the future of Amgen's best-selling product and possibly the very survival
of two of the companies.

    Epogen generated about $1.8 billion (U.S.) in sales for Amgen in 1999 and
worldwide revenues were some $4 billion including sales through Amgen licensing
partner Johnson & Johnson Co.

    Neither company is commenting, but the result of the case is crucial for the
wider biotechnology industry because of the central role of strong patents in a
business where control of products and how they are made is the only way to earn
back the sometimes staggeringly high costs of drug development and ensure future
investment for new products.

    ''Patents are fundamental," said Elizabeth Weiswasser, a lawyer with Weil,
Gotschal & Manges. ''We are involved in a lot of deals in this industry and what
you really see them turning on is intellectual property."

    Amgen has claimed a patent on the production in all vertebrates of
erythropoietin, a substance that boosts the number of red blood cells in the
blood and is used to combat anemia in patients undergoing kidney dialysis. Amgen
makes Epogen, its version of the substance, by inserting a human gene into
hamster cells, which then produce the protein.

    Transkaryotic, which wants to market its own version of the drug, called
GA-EPO, makes the substance without animals by inserting a promoter into human
genes, which then stimulates human cells to produce the substance.

    Amgen wants the judge to rule that TKT has violated the patent simply by
using cells from a vertebrate life form - in this case humans - to make
substance. TKT hopes to prove the patent is too broad and unenforceable.

    ''They are trying to keep a patent on the production of erythropoietin in
all vertebrates, which is a very broad interpretation," said Donna Gitter, a
professor in biotechnology patent law at Fordham University Schools of Business
in New York.

    ''The question is whether Amgen is interpreting its patent as too broad, and
that can have important implications. If the patent is interpreted too broadly,
start-up companies could have a hard time getting going."

    Such a result would be contrary to the spirit, if not the letter, of U.S.
patent law, which aims to spur innovation by giving inventors a chance to recoup
the cost of developing new products, Gitter said.

    Judge William Young is trying the case without a jury.


LOAD-DATE: May 15, 2000


                              476 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Sun Media Corporation
                      London Free Press (Ontario, Canada)

                       May 7, 2000, Sunday, Final EDITION

SECTION: EDITORIAL/OPINION, Pg. A10, NATIONAL AFFAIRS

LENGTH: 768 words

HEADLINE: MP'S ATTACK ON SUZUKI HARD TO SWALLOW

BYLINE: MARK BONOKOSKI, SPECIAL TO THE FREE PRESS

DATELINE: OTTAWA

BODY:


   The House of Commons, as friendly as any viper pit, has rules of conduct
which surely befuddle and bewilder children whose school field trips find them
sitting in the public gallery.

   One can see it written on their faces.

   It is quite acceptable, for example, for a parliamentarian to stand in the
House and slander the good name of anyone in the land, yet totally unacceptable
for one of his adversaries to stand in response and rightfully name the MP a
liar.

   It is a confusing paradox.

   As long as an MP is in the safety of the House of Commons, he can say
virtually whatever he wants about anyone in public or private life -- even
suggest, perchance, that a well-known TV personality might have an insincere
agenda or an ulterior motive behind his stand on a particular issue which bears
investigation.

   A case in point.

   Judging by the biographic material available on Canadian scientist David
Suzuki, one would have little trouble accepting that he is an expert on
genetics, as well as a man of great principle and honour.

   Yet if you sat in on debates in the Commons last week when the labelling of
genetically altered Frankenfood was on the discussion table, you might wonder if
there was a Dr. Suzuki as well as a Mr. Hyde.

   Having spent 30 years in the RCMP, Canadian Alliance MP Howard Hilstrom
should know a thing or two about slandering and libelling.

   During his cop career, he was involved in numerous investigations involving
both commercial and organized crime, leaving little doubt he has heard a few bad
things said about good people, and more than a few good things said about the
bad.

   Heard it in court, heard it on the streets.

   As for genetically modified organics (GMO), Hilstrom's ownership of a beef
cattle ranch in his Manitoba riding of Selkirk-Interlake might suggest he would
not turn a deaf ear toward this sort of burgeoning science -- not if it can
speed cattle growth, cut down on disease, cheapen the price of crops and fodder,
etc.

   So let's take that as a given.

   Nonetheless, what Hilstrom said in the Commons about Suzuki last week was
startling, especially since it managed to escape notice.

   What Hilstrom did was accuse Suzuki of possibly being against GMOs, not
because of any scientific evidence, but to advance his own financial gain.

   "I wonder about fellows like David Suzuki, who is really a media
personality," said Hilstrom, "although it says on his resume that he has a bit
of a background in genetics.

   "When he makes his arguments, how many times does he actually come up with
scientific research, or point out that it is accepted by the scientific
community?" he asked.

   "Being media personalities, I know these (people) are paid big salaries, in
millions of dollars.

   "In Mr. Suzuki's case (though), I wonder if he has some investments in
non-GMO companies and thinks he can help them along if he could help kill off
the GMO industry.

   "We have to look at the background on this."

   So, there it is -- his accusations protected by Parliament because they were
said in the House, and acceptable to repeat here because the same protection is
offered for the very same reason.

   Hilstrom's point that Suzuki has "a bit of a background in genetics."

   A bit? If a "bit" is having a doctorate in genetics, more than 15
high-ranking professional honours, 14 honourary degrees, more than a half- dozen
books to his credit, as well as the same number or more of both television and
radio documentaries, then a bit it is.

   But that is not the definition of a bit.

   It is like saying Wayne Gretzky knows a bit about hockey, or that bears know
a bit about the woods.

   This is not to say, however, that Howard Hilstrom did not have legitimate
points when it came to supporting GMO products and downplaying demand for
expensive labelling, which could, in fact, take away the affordability of Third
World countries to buy potentially cheaper food.

   There was legitimacy, too, when he cited how bio-technology has developed,
among other things, a high-vitamin rice that has reduced child blindness,
vaccine for viruses, gene therapy for hereditary disorders, better non-toxic
weed controls and faster reforestation.

   So not everything bio-tech should be condemned willy-nilly as Frankenstuff.

   Why Hilstrom decided to particularly lash out at Suzuki in such a personal
manner, however, remains a bit of a puzzle, especially when he can be accused of
the very same thing he accused Suzuki of doing -- which is not presenting any
evidence to back his position.

   Maybe it was something he ate.

   It's the only possible explanation.

NOTES:
Mark Bonokoski is Sun Media's national affairs columnist. His columnappears
Sundays, Tuesdays and Thursdays.

LOAD-DATE: May 8, 2000


                              477 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Sun Media Corporation
                      London Free Press (Ontario, Canada)

                       May 7, 2000, Sunday, Final EDITION

SECTION: EDITORIAL/OPINION, Pg. A10, NATIONAL AFFAIRS

LENGTH: 768 words

HEADLINE: MP'S ATTACK ON SUZUKI HARD TO SWALLOW

BYLINE: MARK BONOKOSKI, SPECIAL TO THE FREE PRESS

DATELINE: OTTAWA

BODY:


   The House of Commons, as friendly as any viper pit, has rules of conduct
which surely befuddle and bewilder children whose school field trips find them
sitting in the public gallery.

   One can see it written on their faces.

   It is quite acceptable, for example, for a parliamentarian to stand in the
House and slander the good name of anyone in the land, yet totally unacceptable
for one of his adversaries to stand in response and rightfully name the MP a
liar.

   It is a confusing paradox.

   As long as an MP is in the safety of the House of Commons, he can say
virtually whatever he wants about anyone in public or private life -- even
suggest, perchance, that a well-known TV personality might have an insincere
agenda or an ulterior motive behind his stand on a particular issue which bears
investigation.

   A case in point.

   Judging by the biographic material available on Canadian scientist David
Suzuki, one would have little trouble accepting that he is an expert on
genetics, as well as a man of great principle and honour.

   Yet if you sat in on debates in the Commons last week when the labelling of
genetically altered Frankenfood was on the discussion table, you might wonder if
there was a Dr. Suzuki as well as a Mr. Hyde.

   Having spent 30 years in the RCMP, Canadian Alliance MP Howard Hilstrom
should know a thing or two about slandering and libelling.

   During his cop career, he was involved in numerous investigations involving
both commercial and organized crime, leaving little doubt he has heard a few bad
things said about good people, and more than a few good things said about the
bad.

   Heard it in court, heard it on the streets.

   As for genetically modified organics (GMO), Hilstrom's ownership of a beef
cattle ranch in his Manitoba riding of Selkirk-Interlake might suggest he would
not turn a deaf ear toward this sort of burgeoning science -- not if it can
speed cattle growth, cut down on disease, cheapen the price of crops and fodder,
etc.

   So let's take that as a given.

   Nonetheless, what Hilstrom said in the Commons about Suzuki last week was
startling, especially since it managed to escape notice.

   What Hilstrom did was accuse Suzuki of possibly being against GMOs, not
because of any scientific evidence, but to advance his own financial gain.

   "I wonder about fellows like David Suzuki, who is really a media
personality," said Hilstrom, "although it says on his resume that he has a bit
of a background in genetics.

   "When he makes his arguments, how many times does he actually come up with
scientific research, or point out that it is accepted by the scientific
community?" he asked.

   "Being media personalities, I know these (people) are paid big salaries, in
millions of dollars.

   "In Mr. Suzuki's case (though), I wonder if he has some investments in
non-GMO companies and thinks he can help them along if he could help kill off
the GMO industry.

   "We have to look at the background on this."

   So, there it is -- his accusations protected by Parliament because they were
said in the House, and acceptable to repeat here because the same protection is
offered for the very same reason.

   Hilstrom's point that Suzuki has "a bit of a background in genetics."

   A bit? If a "bit" is having a doctorate in genetics, more than 15
high-ranking professional honours, 14 honourary degrees, more than a half- dozen
books to his credit, as well as the same number or more of both television and
radio documentaries, then a bit it is.

   But that is not the definition of a bit.

   It is like saying Wayne Gretzky knows a bit about hockey, or that bears know
a bit about the woods.

   This is not to say, however, that Howard Hilstrom did not have legitimate
points when it came to supporting GMO products and downplaying demand for
expensive labelling, which could, in fact, take away the affordability of Third
World countries to buy potentially cheaper food.

   There was legitimacy, too, when he cited how bio-technology has developed,
among other things, a high-vitamin rice that has reduced child blindness,
vaccine for viruses, gene therapy for hereditary disorders, better non-toxic
weed controls and faster reforestation.

   So not everything bio-tech should be condemned willy-nilly as Frankenstuff.

   Why Hilstrom decided to particularly lash out at Suzuki in such a personal
manner, however, remains a bit of a puzzle, especially when he can be accused of
the very same thing he accused Suzuki of doing -- which is not presenting any
evidence to back his position.

   Maybe it was something he ate.

   It's the only possible explanation.

NOTES:
Mark Bonokoski is Sun Media's national affairs columnist. His columnappears
Sundays, Tuesdays and Thursdays.

LOAD-DATE: May 9, 2000


                              478 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                         May 7, 2000, Sunday, Edition 1

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 582 words

HEADLINE: 100 LEGS BAD, SIX LEGS GOOD FOR INSECTS

BODY:



    Maggie Fox WASHINGTON

    ACOUPLE OF genes helped insects evolve from leggy millipedes and boring
worms into flies, beetles and fleas, researchers say. And the genes probably
helped the insects become among the most numerous creatures on Earth.

    When they suppressed the two genes in beetle larvae, the grubs grew extra
legs, although they did not work well, say Randy Bennett and colleagues at
Brigham Young University in Provo, Utah. ''We got legs everywhere," Bennett
says.

    The findings, published Monday in the Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, shed light on how so many different animals developed and also have
implications for scientists studying human genetics - even gene therapy, Bennett
says.

    ''They were central characters in the specialization of the insect body
plan, " he says. ''These two were involved in making the abdomen, the hind end
of an insect, special and different from the middle.

    ''We do see that there are a lot of similar genes involved in most animals,
and we are trying to see how they use these to make different body types."

    Eons ago, there were far fewer kinds of creatures around, says Bennett, a
developmental biologist. Only when they developed new genes could things get
interesting.

    ''Building a genetic tool kit allows different animals to diversify. Until
you have a certain number of tools - genes - in your tool box, animals could not
do much but be sponges and jellyfish and flatworms."

    Once they got a few interesting genes, ''then they could have fun."

    Insects, which include flies, beetles, fleas and bees, have six legs on the
middle region or thorax of their bodies. But fossils show that modern insects
descended from animals that looked more like centipedes, with many legs and
sometimes multiple wings along their bodies.

    Bennett said the two genes, known as Ubx and abd-A, helped insects develop
the three-regioned body plan that is so familiar - head, thorax and abdomen. The
thorax is the only region with legs and wings on it.

    The genes belong to a family of genes, known as hox genes, known to encode
master body plans.

    They also play a role in humans.

    ''They don't do exactly the same thing," Bennett says. ''They do help make
different regions of the body different from other regions. So if you look down
the spinal column, you see that cervical vertebrae are different from the
thoracic vertebrae."

    He says his experiment would not create monstrous babies if tried on human
beings. ''If we took (the genes) out of humans, we would not get legs coming
out."

    But the findings have implications for studying human genetics, because the
study shows that genes have complex relationships and that changing one gene can
alter the functions of many others.

    And Bennett says the study helps illustrate how animals gained evolutionary
advantages. Winged insects have a clear advantage over millipedes: ''When you
pick up a rock, when you look under a log, you find centipedes or millipedes.

    ''You don't see

    them just everywhere, whereas insects we do see just everywhere. So there
seems to be an advantage to having wings and six legs."

    Terence Dickinson

    will return May 21

    Swedish physicists have found that two sections cut from an old vinyl LP
record can form a cheap lens for refracting X-rays. It could be valuable as a
tool in laboratory-scale arrangements for X-ray applications such as imaging,
microscopy, fluorescence and diffraction.


LOAD-DATE: May 7, 2000


                              479 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                         May 7, 2000, Sunday, Edition 1

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 817 words

HEADLINE: HEALTH-CARE SYSTEM CAN BE MENDED

BODY:



    IT'S UNDERSTANDABLE that newspaper editors should splay ''ER crisis" stories
across their front pages.

    Those passing a newspaper box where the top copy shouts ''ER crisis" are
likely to pick one up to learn how worried they should be that they may end up
on a stretcher in the hallway of an overcrowded, underfunded hospital emergency
room.

    Still, it would be useful if these editors would keep in their desks a copy
of the 1995 report on emergency department use in Toronto's hospitals. As health
expert Michael Decter reports in his forthcoming book, Four Strong Winds, this
study found that of 1 million visitors to Toronto hospital emergency
departments, only 200,000, or just one in five ''could be justified on the basis
of actual need." There is a crisis of misuse, therefore, rather than a systemic
failure.

    Ideologues talk up a crisis

    It's also understandable that neo-conservative ideologues who favour an
American-style two-tier health system - but are too smart to say so out loud -
should constantly declare the public system is in crisis. They are trying to
panic Canadians into believing that private medicine has to be allowed in to
save the system.

    It's depressing, though, when intelligent and informed observers repeat the
argument that our health care is in crisis because of the inexorable increases
in costs caused by demography and technology and, therefore, either we'll go
bankrupt trying to preserve it or we'll have to give it up and go to a two-tier
system. One such able, detached observer is The Globe and Mail's columnist,
Jeffrey Simpson. He's constantly preaching impending health-care doom, most
recently in last week's column titled ''Medicare is running out of time to prove
itself."

    As ought to be relevant, our existing system has no need to prove itself.
It's one of the best in the world. Beyond any question, it's incomparably better
than the U.S. system, which costs twice as much per person and leaves 40 million
citizens with no coverage at all.

    The core of the ''running out of time" argument is that health-care costs
are uncontrollable because of demography and technology. Therefore, we have to
bring in new private money.

    That's half true. True, we're all getting wrinklier. But we're also
incomparably healthier than we've ever been - better food, more exercise, less
drinking, less smoking.

    True, new technology is more expensive. But it's also ever more efficient.
Laser eye surgery does in hours what used to take five days in hospital. The
newest MRIs can take in 20 seconds an image that used to require half an hour.
Gene therapy will be the most efficient medicine ever.

    Costs rise as we take more pills

    The principal cause of health-care cost increases is neither demography or
technology. It's because we've become a population of pill poppers. Our
consumption now costs $13 billion a year and is rising faster than the use of
Viagara.

    Indeed, money is only a secondary health-care problem. We happen to have
luck on our side. Our economy is growing so fast, and tax revenues even faster,
that spending more on health care - and keeping it a one-tier system - is
entirely within our capability.

    The issue, instead, is how to best spend, rather than how much more to
spend.

    Decter's book contains some first-rate guidelines. He points out that
traditional hospitals that once were the sun of our entire health-care system
are now more like planets, important but no longer the centre of everything.

    In the U.S., fewer than one-half of existing hospital beds are unused. In
Canada, the number of children going into hospitals has dropped by 40 per cent
in the last decade. From now on, hospitals will have to ''focus on services
rather than beds."

    At one time, doctors were never-questioned authority figures but now are
less and less at the health-care system's centre. Patient bills of rights are
today's vogue. Pharmaceutical companies, which once aimed all their advertising
at doctors so that they would prescribe their brands, increasingly aim their
advertising at ordinary citizens, who then nag their doctors for these products.
Doctor discontent is as much about loss of status as about money.

    One of Decter's key solutions is to put the health-care emphasis on primary
care. It so happens that Ontario is doing exactly this. It has changed its fee
structure to encourage family doctors - the goal is 80 per cent of them in four
years - to form group practices, in which they can support each other and, by
providing 24-hour service, encourage patients to go to the clinic rather than to
emergency departments.

    In short, intelligent reforms are possible. Fix our health-care system
rather than scrap it, because it isn't broke, just a bit bruised.

    Richard Gwyn's column appears Wednesday, Friday and Sunday in The Star. He
can be reached at gwyn@inforamp.net


LOAD-DATE: May 7, 2000


                              481 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Sun Media Corporation
                      London Free Press (Ontario, Canada)

                      May 2, 2000, Tuesday, Final EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. A1

LENGTH: 543 words

HEADLINE: RESEARCHERS FIND MOLECULES THAT FIGHT ORGAN REJECTION LONDON LAB MAKES
KEY TRANSPLANT FIND

BYLINE: MARY-JANE EGAN, FREE PRESS HEALTH REPORTER

BODY:


   In the race to save thousands who die worldwide each year on transplant
waiting lists, London scientists may have uncovered the key to successful
animal-to-human organ transplants.

   Local researchers have discovered the significance of two molecules --
Interferon gamma and Interleukin 12 -- in battling organ rejection in
cross-species transplants.

   High levels of these "survivor molecules" significantly extended the lives of
mice transplanted with the hearts of rats, raising hopes for a new source of
transplants for humans, said Bob Zhong, director of experimental surgery in the
multi-organ transplant program of the London Health Sciences Centre.

   The groundbreaking findings of research teams led by Zhong and David Kelvin,
immunologist at Robarts Research Institute and the University of Western
Ontario, will be published in today's issue of the prestigious journal Nature
Medicine.

   Ultimately, Zhong predicts, gene therapy will allow doctors to increase
levels of one or both molecules in the organs of transgenic pigs -- pigs
injected with human genes -- to make them more suitable for transplant into
humans.

   Local scientists, in conjunction with a group in Cambridge, England, have
been breeding transgenic pigs since 1994 at a farm near Guelph with the goal of
tricking the human immune system into accepting the pig organ.

   Pigs bred bacteria-free are considered the ideal source of future
animal-to-human organ transplants because they're a close match to humans.

   Zhong said discovery of the importance of Interferon gamma and Interleukin 12
provides a "genetic starting point" in battling cross-species organ rejection.

   Both molecules are present in humans and actually accelerate organ rejection
in human-to-human transplants, but have the reverse effect in cross-species or
xenotransplants, Zhong said.

   In rodent studies, mice with high levels of the two molecules took an average
24 days to reject the transplanted hearts of rats while mice lacking the
molecules rejected their transplants in only six days.

   Kelvin said the molecules suppress the immune response that destroys
xenotransplanted hearts.

   Zhong called it "really remarkable" that the transplanted mice lived 24 days
without any type of anti-rejection drug.

   Combined with new drugs designed to battle cross-species rejection, he
foresees "even better results."

   The next step in animal testing will involve transplanting pig organs into
baboons while increasing levels of the two molecules.

   London still holds the world record for the longest surviving baboons after
kidney transplants from transgenic pigs -- 40 days.

   Within 18 months, Zhong predicts London will be able to achieve a six-month
survival rate for baboons with transplanted pig organs.

   The Canadian government requires a six-month survival rate before human
trials begin.

   Research is funded through a $ 160,000 internal grant from LHSC's multi-
organ transplant unit and $ 40,000 from the Heart and Stroke Foundation.

   About 4,000 Canadians are awaiting organs at any given time, including 1, 400
in Ontario.

   But with only 1,600 transplants done each year, more than half those waiting
are in danger of dying or requiring kidney dialysis before a match is found.

GRAPHIC: photo by Morris Lamont, The London Free Press Dr. David Kelvin, left,
and Dr. Bob Zhong display two mice involved in an experimental heart transplant
project at the University campus of the London Health Sciences Centre.
Researchers have discovered two molecules play a significant role in battling
organ rejection in cross-species transplants.

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2000


                              485 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Sun Media Corporation
                      London Free Press (Ontario, Canada)

                     April 28, 2000, Friday, Final EDITION

SECTION: LIFESTYLE, Pg. C12

LENGTH: 389 words

HEADLINE: SCIENTISTS NEARER SCHIZOPHRENIA GENE

BYLINE: MARLENE HABIB, CP

DATELINE: TORONTO

BODY:


   Researchers have moved closer to pinpointing a gene responsible for
schizophrenia.

   A Canadian-U.S. study led by Dr. Anne Bassett of the University of Toronto
has isolated the "neighbourhood" one of the genes lives in, Bassett said
yesterday.

   The study, based on a 12-year assessment of 300 Canadians in 22 families with
a high incidence of schizophrenia, is in the current edition of the New
York-based journal Science.

   "This is the strongest evidence yet for a gene in any complex psychiatric
illness," Bassett said.

   "We've zeroed in on where a gene for schizophrenia is, but we don't have the
gene yet."

   Schizophrenia -- the second most common mental illness, after depression --
is a biochemical disease of the brain. Symptoms include disorganized thinking,
delusions, hallucinations and drastic changes in emotions and behaviour.

   Previous research has found a genetic predisposition for the mental illness,
which affects about 350,000 Canadians and usually surfaces in young adulthood.

   Bassett, who's also with the Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, and Dr.
Linda Brzustowicz of Rutgers University in New Jersey, are among researchers who
believe there are several genes involved. Bassett adds there may also be
environmental factors involved.

   Their research is the first to pinpoint at least one gene, found in a small
area of chromosome 1, that likely predisposes people to schizophrenia.

   For the study, they assessed the 22 families, each of which has at least two
members with the illness. The 300 individuals had a thorough psychiatric and
health assessment, which included analysing their blood samples to break down
their DNA.

   Although some illnesses, such as Huntington's and cystic fibrosis, are linked
with a single gene, there are likely many genes responsible for schizophrenia,
said Bassett, and that has been a major stumbling block in studying the illness.

   She added that her research, funded by the Medical Research Council of Canada
as well as other Canadian and U.S. funding groups, could also be applied to
other neurological illnesses, such as epilepsy.

   The next step in the study is to continue to examine the human genome to
pinpoint the schizophrenia gene, which could lead to better medications, such as
anti-psychotics, and possibly gene therapy down the road.

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 2000


                              486 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                       April 28, 2000, Friday, Edition 1

SECTION: LIFE

LENGTH: 438 words

BODY:

    Successful reversal of the aging process in animal cells has been
 reported by researchers at U.S.-based Advanced Cell Technology,
 according to Science magazine. The company collaborated with the
 Terry Fox Laboratory and Cancer Research Centre in Vancouver. The
 breakthrough may eventually cure some of humankind's most
 instransigent age-related and degenerative diseases, such as
 Parkinson's, Alzheimer's and diabetes, as well as heart, liver
 and kidney disease, says the magazine.


    Immune disease French researchers have developed a method of gene therapy to

 treat the life-threatening severe combined immunodeficiency X1
 disease. Patients with this immune system defect are normally
 confined to sterile ''bubbles" until the current treatment, a
 bone marrow transplant, is attempted. The new therapy replaces a
 copy of the defective gene.

    Heart disease Men and women with higher levels of hostility are more likely
to
 develop heart disease, according to the U.S. National Heart, Lung
 and Blood Institute. They also show higher levels of
 homocysteine, a blood chemical strongly associated with coronary
 heart disease. Men who reported that they consistently held in
 angry feelings also showed higher levels of homocysteine.

    Migraines The painfully sensitive skin that accompanies many migraines has
 revealed a new understanding of the debilitating headaches. The
 study, from Boston's Beth Israel Deaconness, is the first human
 test of a migraine model that may explain why current medications
 are ineffective in many cases and suggests a new target for the
 next generation of migraine drugs.

    Strokes People with high levels of iron in their blood may suffer more
 from strokes than people with lower levels. The iron might
 combine with chemicals to damage cells in a process known as
 oxidative stress, say researchers in Girona, Spain. The study
 adds to a growing body of evidence that having too much iron is
 almost as bad as having too little. High iron levels are also
 linked to a greater heart attack risk.

    Alcoholism Primary care physicians may soon be able to screen for alcohol
 problems by testing for three biochemical changes caused by heavy
 drinking. The tests could also signal when patients in alcohol
 treatment programs have relapsed, say researchers at the U.S.
 National Institute on Alcohol Abuse & Alcoholism. Other possible
 screeners are insurance companies, liver transplant specialists
 and the courts.

    FROM THE STAR'S NEWS SERVICES

    For more health news visit www.thestar.com/editorial/health.


LOAD-DATE: April 28, 2000


                              487 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                      April 19, 2000, Wednesday, Edition 1

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 395 words

HEADLINE: PRIZE HONOURS MEDICAL RESEARCHERS

BODY:



    Tanya Talaga Figuring out that Aspirin can help prevent heart attacks and
 decoding the complex language of human genes were advances that
 helped change the face of medicine.

    For their discoveries, Dr. Jack Hirsh of Hamilton's McMaster University and
Dr. Robert Roeder of Rockefeller University in New York city were honoured
yesterday by the Gairdner Foundation of Toronto.

    They were among five selected for the Gairdner award, which honours medical
scientists who have greatly enhanced the quality of human life.

    Winners are an elite group. Of the 256 people honoured in the award's
40-plus years, 52 have also won the Nobel Prize. In October, some of them will
come to Toronto for a ''Minds That Matter" conference, a scientific binge of
mini- symposiums among top researchers.

    Hirsh and Roeder have worked in their respective fields - thrombosis and
genetics - for 30 years.

    Hirsh, of the Hamilton Civic Hospital Research Centre, pioneered the use of
drug therapy to reduce death by heart attack and stroke. In the late 1960s, not
much was known about how to treat thrombosis - blood clots that often result in
strokes and heart attacks.

    Hirsh helped set international standards for dosing and use of anticoagulant
(clot-busting) drugs such as low-molecular-weight heparin and warfarin, which
dramatically reduced heart and stroke death rates.

    Thirty years ago, someone hospitalized after a heart attack had about a 30
per cent chance of dying, Hirsh said. With new drug therapies, the rate is 6 per
cent.

    Hirsh was also among the first to do large studies that proved Aspirin's
effectiveness in preventing stroke and heart attack. After a study he did with
the University of Western Ontario, the use of Aspirin took off.

    Roeder has been studying how to read genetic information for 30 years:
''I've been working on the same problem since graduate school," he said.

    His research has profound implications for unlocking genetic information
pertinent to human disease and improving gene therapy. Gairdner Foundation
president Dr. John Dirks described Roeder's work, with that of fellow award
winner Dr. Robert Kornberg of Stanford University, as ground-breaking.

    Other winners include Alain Townsend of Oxford University and Emil Unanue of
Washington University in St. Louis, Mo. Each award includes $30,000 Cdn.


GRAPHIC: HONOURED:
 Dr. Jack Hirsh, top, and Dr. Robert Roeder have been awarded the Gairdner
prize, worth $30,000.

LOAD-DATE: April 19, 2000


                              490 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                       April 18, 2000, Tuesday, Edition 1

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 673 words

HEADLINE: VENERABLE SOCIETY BIDS FOR A MODERN ROLE

BODY:



    117-year-old group wants

    to assess new hot issues

    Peter Calamai

    OTTAWA - Unpacked file boxes are piled waist-high, the boardroom lacks a
proper table and the website seriously needs updating.

    Still the Royal Society of Canada is in new offices and eager to launch a
new phase of its 117-year existence - as a national oracle on science and
technology.

    If the little-known but venerable society makes this jump, it will put
behind itself a troubled relationship with the federal government and join the
mainstream ranks of august national academies in the United States, Britain and
France.

    Ordinary Canadians would gain a regular source of independent expert advice
about some of society's hottest potatoes such as human gene therapy and cloning.

    The advice would come from panels of experts assembled by the Royal Society
at the request of the federal government, something that's been done several
times on a sporadic basis. The government would have no say in choosing the
experts and no advance look at reports, a major shift from most existing
advisory panels appointed by cabinet ministers.

    ''It takes courage for a government to do this because they don't have any
say. But they gain credibility because the advice comes from an entirely
independent group," says William Leiss, the University of Calgary professor now
president of the Royal Society.

    Modelled on the French academies when founded in 1883, the self-perpetuating
Royal Society elects members on the basis of excellence in scholarship in the
arts, humanities and science.

    Its 1,500 fellows are predominately academics, overwhelmingly male and
mostly 50 or older.

    Junior science minister Gilbert Normand supports a more active advisory role
for the society, which has often been on the margins of public debate despite
its elite roster.

    ''I think we can transform this organization to give them better visibility,
" says Normand.

    Transformation takes money.

    Royal Society members have been paying their own way for traditional
activities such as scholarships, public communication of science, awards and
participation on international councils.

    But ad-hoc federal requests for expert advice have strained the society's
resources.

    Experts recruited by the society pronounced last year on health risks from
cell phones (minor and manageable).

    Other panels are probing the future of genetically engineered food and the
current cost-benefit assumptions about air pollution.

    That's three requests in less than two years. So now the Royal Society is
asking the federal government to formalize this ad-hoc relationship by paying
$1.5 million annually for the cost of running the advice bureau.

    ''We can't continue to carry this on our own. We've been running on a
shoestring and we've reached the breaking point," says Leiss, who shuttles
between his full-time professorial post in Calgary and the society's new offices
here.

    Those offices are a concrete sign of improved relations between the federal
government and the Canadian Academy of the Sciences and Humanities, a more
descriptive name registered by the Royal Society as its trademark.

    The new digs on the ground floor of a downtown federal building are provided
rent-free for five years. Such arrangements had been standard for decades until
relations soured during the 1990s.

    With little warning, the industry department did not renew a services
contract forcing the society to lay off all but three employees. Funding for the
office space was also axed.

    ''It was a very difficult time," says political scientist John Meisel who
was society president from 1992 to 1995.

    Others involved at the time say there was blame on both sides. The society
failed to deliver on some contracted services and some federal advisers were
hostile, seeing the Royal fellows as competitors.

    Britain, France and Sweden all help support their national academies
financially and increasingly have turned to them for disinterested, expert
advice.


LOAD-DATE: April 18, 2000


                              493 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                      April 12, 2000, Wednesday, Edition 1

SECTION: BUSINESS

LENGTH: 766 words

HEADLINE: TORONTO POTENTIAL HUB OF GENETIC RESEARCH

BODY:

    WITHOUT a great deal of fanfare, something critical for Toronto's
 - and Ontario's - future success is being put together in
 Toronto's research hospitals and the University of Toronto's
 faculty of medicine.

    This is the infrastructure necessary for a major effort in genetics research
and development, which will provide the home for large numbers of researchers
and, it is expected, the spawning of many new businesses, and the jobs that go
with them, in the genetics revolution.

    It is an Ontario initiative and it not only puts Ontario ahead of the rest
of the country, but has the potential to make it one of the leading genetics R&D
centres in North America.

    Over the next five years, Ontario, through its Ontario Research and
Development Challenge Fund, expects to invest $75.2 million, its share of total
expected investment of $193 million, in the necessary research infrastructure.

    As the mapping of the human genome nears completion, the stage is being set
for another industrial revolution, similar to the information technology
revolution.

    This one will radically change medicine and the treatment of disease, and
also significantly impact agriculture, environmental practices and even the
computer chip. So-called ''biochips" open up the possibility not only of even
faster and cheaper computers but a wide range of bio-sensor and other
applications.

    Much of the credit for this initiative goes to Cal Stiller, chair of the
Challenge Fund and of the Canadian Medical Discovery Fund, Ken Knox, deputy
minister of energy, science and technology, and Lou Siminovitch, the dean of
genetics research in Canada, as well as to Energy, Science and Technology
Minister Jim Wilson.

    ''This is the future of Ontario," says Siminovitch, who says some elements
are still missing but adds that ''no one else in Canada has come close to this."

    The initiative began about 18 months ago when the Challenge Fund began to
receive some applications for work in genomics. But, says Siminovitch, it was
recognized that if Ontario was to be a player in this important new industry, a
piecemeal approach would not work.

    So he was charged with devising a strategy which the Challenge Fund board
accepted as the Ontario Genomics Initiative.

    Earlier this month, one of the projects was unveiled at the Hospital for
Sick Children - the Centre for Genomic Computation, a $24.7 million project,
with $8 million from the Challenge Fund.

    Previously announced projects included:

    The Ontario Microarray Network at the Ontario Cancer Research Institute
($16. 5 million, including $5.5 million from the Challenge Fund); a protein
production facility to support proteomics research through a network at the
Ontario Cancer Institute, the Hospital for Sick Children and McMaster University
($15.2 million including $5.1 million from the Challenge Fund) ; and the Centre
for Gene Therapy and Immune Modulation at McMaster University ($20.1 million,
including $6.7 million from the Challenge Fund).

    In addition, another seven projects have been conditionally approved, with a
total investment of $116.5 million, including $49 million Challenge funding.

    These include a provincial program in gene discovery and genomics, a network
of nuclear magnetic resonation spectroscopy labs, a network of protein
crystallography labs, a combinatorial and high-throughput screening initiative
within the Ontario genomics program, an Ontario-wide protein identification
facility, and a plant and animal genomics initiative.

    This takes Ontario, with the research hubbed in Toronto, a long way in
building up the necessary infrastructure.

    Ontario hopes to build on that capacity with support from the Genome Canada
initiative outlined in Finance Minister Paul Martin's recent budget. It has $160
million to invest in genomics research facilities over the next five years.

    But as Siminovitch points out, these investments are for infrastructure.
What's also needed are research grants to support bright researchers using the
infrastructure.

    One hopeful source is the planned Canadian Institute for Health Research,
which when it is up and running will have about $500 million a year to support
researchers.

    What's important is Ontario is developing good prospects - centred in
Toronto - to catch up with what has been happening in the United States and
Europe and to emerge as a key centre for genomics research and a thriving
genomics industry.

    David Crane is The Star's economics editor. His column appears Tuesday to
Thursday, Saturday and Sunday.


LOAD-DATE: April 12, 2000


                              494 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                        April 9, 2000, Sunday, Edition 1

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 568 words

HEADLINE: SCIENTISTS UNLOCKING THE SECRETS OF LIFE

BYLINE: Tanya Talaga

BODY:



    Gene hunters make huge strides that will revolutionize medicine

    VANCOUVER - Researchers are at the beginning of the end of
 unlocking the secrets of life, a profound medical triumph that
 promises to change modern medicine.

    Starting today, an international collection of gene hunters are meeting in
Vancouver to update one another on the massive public effort to identify the
human genome.

    The genome is a blueprint of how billions of pieces of DNA come together to
form life. DNA provides your body with a list of instructions, telling it how to
evolve or grow. The DNA sequence makes up the genes, of which humans have about
100,000.

    Human genome research promises to revolutionize medicine, bringing with it
profound changes.

    ''When we understand how the changes in these genes are associated with
disease, we can then work towards developing therapies," said Dr. Michael
Hayden, chair of the organizing committee here.

    For example, gene-based drugs will be able to treat complex diseases like
diabetes and hypertension, and gene therapy will be successful for hemophilia.

    Our genome is also linked to a variety of inherited diseases, such as some
cancers, Alzheimer's disease, and psychiatric disorders such as schizophrenia
and depression.

    But don't expect the changes overnight. Deciphering the code is only the
first step and it will take years for scientists to figure out what it says.

    ''This is a long journey," said Dr. Lap-Chee Tsui, president of the Human
Genome Organization (HUGO). ''Sequencing of the human genome is technically
challenging but a reachable end point. To understand its function and to be able
to make use of it is a big step."

    Late last week, Celera Genomics, a private U.S. gene-mining firm, said it
had 99 per cent of the code identified.

    A progress report on the public gene hunt will be given here by Dr. Francis
Collins, director of the U.S. National Human Genome Research Institute. While
Celera has made remarkable progress, it has been going about it in an entirely
different way than the public effort, said Tsui.

    ''The method they use is more of a shotgun sampling," he said, adding it's
like having many pieces of a jigsaw puzzle, but one that can't be put together
to make a picture.

    HUGO is a group of researchers who came together in 1989 to start the public
effort, known as the Human Genome Project. Scientists from universities and
government-run labs in the United States, the United Kingdom, Germany and Japan
are working on the project.

    The Human Genome Project is organizing its hunt around the 23 pairs of
chromosomes found inside cells. People inherit one set of chromosomes from each
parent. Inside the set are billions of pieces of DNA.

    ''They want to establish a map of the chromosomes and based on the map, they
want to bring it down to smaller and smaller pieces," Tsui said.

    However, in the end, Tsui said using both methods will benefit everybody.

    Both public and private interests have been trying to crack the code for the
last 10 years. The public arm believes the knowledge should be shared throughout
the world to further research. The private effort is responsible to shareholders
first.

    ''I hope they also consider the need for general researchers of the (gene)
sequences. For the good of mankind, I think they should release the sequence as
soon as possible."


LOAD-DATE: April 9, 2000


                              496 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                      April 5, 2000, Wednesday, Edition 1

SECTION: BUSINESS

LENGTH: 875 words

HEADLINE: NEW TECH ROLE OPENS TSE TO JOLTS

BYLINE: James Daw

BODY:





    Markets snap back after steep plunge

    BUSINESS REPORTER

    Lasers and cyberspace shook the Toronto stock market and its old rocks-and-
trees image yesterday.

    The Toronto Stock Exchange's benchmark 300 composite index plunged nearly
700 points, or 7 per cent, by 1:30 p.m. before staging a partial recovery to end
the day down about 2.5 per cent, or 232.89 points, at 9,141.84.

    More on markets, E5, E8

    A V-shaped graph of the day's action looked uncannily similar to that of New
York's technology-dominated Nasdaq composite index.

    ''Technology stocks like Nortel Networks Corp. have reached such inflated
values that they have taken the market hostage," said John McColl, director of
the personal investment management group at ScotiaMcLeod Inc.

    ''Twenty years ago, resource stocks had the same distorting effect on
movements of the index," he said.

    McColl recalled the days when speculation about exploration successes pushed
the value of Dome Petroleum Ltd. to a higher market valuation than the Royal
Bank of Canada. Today, Nortel's market value is worth more than a few banks
combined.

    Nortel and a handful of other stocks have risen spectacularly over the past
year, all driven by the exuberance over the Internet economy.

    But enthusiasm for these stocks has cooled sharply this year, in part
because of the comments of such high-profile strategists as Abby Joseph Cohen of
Goldman Sachs & Co. in New York.

    Yesterday morning was the worst dive of the year for the markets, but prices
got low enough that some investors began to see value in the stocks once again,
McColl said.

    The overwhelming influence of Nortel and lesser technology stocks belies the
image of the Toronto market as being driven by resource stock action.

    The weighting of technology equipment and software makers within the 300-
stock index has risen from 7 per cent in early 1998 to nearly 30 per cent last
month.

    Meanwhile, mining, energy and forestry stocks have fallen in significance
from 26 per cent of market weightings to less than 15 per cent.

    Nortel makes the laser-based telecommunications equipment essential to
transferring the huge volume of data generated by Internet activity.

    The company and its parent BCE Inc. accounted for more than half of the
movement of Toronto's key index yesterday. Nortel fell $6.05 to $166.50, after
dipping to less than $150 in the early afternoon. When it turned higher, so did
the broad TSE index.

    Barrick Gold Corp., one of the world's largest gold producers, posted a
$1.30 gain to $24.60 yesterday.

    But that move had barely half the impact of little Research In Motion Ltd.,
which has technology for wireless Internet connections. Research in Motion fell
$16.90 to $111 yesterday after being as high as $260 in recent weeks.

    Like Toronto, both the Nasdaq composite index and to a lesser extend the
blue- chip Dow Jones industrial average plunged. The stampede reversed as buyers
returned in search of bargains, and most stocks ended the day with only moderate
losses.

    The selloff came amid a collapse of the euphoria over high-tech stocks that
had driven the Nasdaq to unprecedented gains in recent months. Analysts said
they couldn't point to any one factor in yesterday's massive selling, but most
said the drop was long overdue.

    ''As hard as it is to believe, this is a good thing," said Pete Anderson,
chief investment officer at American Express Financial Advisors in Minneapolis.
''One sector of the market was insanely overvalued. The rest was deeply
undervalued. Now we are reversing that."

    The Nasdaq rebounded to finish down 74.79 points, 1.77 per cent, at
4,148.89. The Dow made its way back to positive territory briefly before turning
lower once again, ending at 11,164.84, down 57.09 points, or 0.51 per cent.

    Over-all, 10 of the TSE's 14 stock groups fell, with declines in technology
stocks pushing the industrial products sector down 3.57 per cent.

    BCE, a major Nortel shareholder, fell $8.50 to $165, while Celestica slid
$5. 25 to $69.

    Some technology stocks, however, turned around. Certicom, for instance,
closed up $7.05 at $105 after hitting a low of $71.50.

    Many biotech companies fell, with Biovail giving up $1.30 to $61.00, and
BioChem Pharma dropping 75 cents to $31.30.

    Smaller biotech stocks also gave up some ground. Genetronics Biomedical
dropped $1 to $8 despite reporting results on the extension of its platform
technology into gene therapy.

    AEterna Laboratories lost $1.75 to $14.25 and Forbes Medi-Tech closed down
20 cents at $12.05.

    In the energy sector, Petro-Canada lost 70 cents to $24.80, Talisman Energy
tumbled $1.95 to $40.75 and Canadian Natural Resources was down $1 to $39 after
the price of crude hit a 12-week low.

    Many investors took heart from the late-day rally that regained the bulk of
the earlier slide, especially with companies beginning to report first- quarter
earnings this week.

    ''The worst of the panic is probably past," said Rick Hutcheon, chief
investment officer at Nova Bancorp Investment Management Ltd. ''Earnings season
is coming up and not a lot of companies have (issued profit warnings). "

    With files from The Star's wire services


GRAPHIC: RENE JOHNSON/TORONTO STAR
 ATTUNED TO MARKET:
 A man talks on the phone while looking at a display board showing the closing
numbers on the TSE yesterday at King and Bay Sts.

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 2000


                              500 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Sun Media Corporation
                      London Free Press (Ontario, Canada)

                     April 1, 2000, Saturday, Final EDITION

SECTION: LIFESTYLE, Pg. C18

LENGTH: 221 words

HEADLINE: SCIENTISTS LINK FLU VIRUS TO HEART DISEASE IN SOME

BYLINE: CP

DATELINE: TORONTO

BODY:


   Canadian researchers say they've discovered how a virus that causes flu- like
symptoms in some people can lead to heart disease in others.

   And they hope the findings could lead to the development of gene therapy, a
vaccine or special screening tests to prevent heart disease that strikes
thousands.

   The University of Toronto researchers say they've found the key enzyme, which
a common virus called Coxsackie virus B3 uses to attack the immune system and
heart tissue.

   The virus has been linked to chronic dilated cardiomyopathy, a common cause
of progressive heart disease, heart failure and sudden death.

   "It's the first time we've found something that this virus needs to make a
heart sick," said Dr. Josef Penninger, 35, an immunologist at the University of
Toronto.

   "This particular enzyme is the magic key the virus uses and so one could now
artificially find a way to change the lock," said Dr. Peter Liu.

   Liu says the findings could lead to the development of gene therapy, a
vaccine or special screening tests to prevent heart disease. Researchers are
developing a vaccine to suppress the enzyme in humans.

   The idea that viruses and bacteria are linked to heart disease has been known
for years.

   More than 333,000 Canadians and more than four million Americans suffer from
heart disease.

LOAD-DATE: April 2, 2000


                              501 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Sun Media Corporation
                      London Free Press (Ontario, Canada)

                     April 1, 2000, Saturday, Final EDITION

SECTION: EDITORIAL/OPINION, Pg. F3, LETTERS TO THE EDITOR

LENGTH: 324 words

HEADLINE: TRANSPLANTATION RISKS ARE POORLY UNDERSTOOD

BYLINE: JOE CUMMINS, GENETICIST AND UWO PROFESSOR EMERITUS LONDON

BODY:


   Regarding the article, Cloned pigs boost transplant hopes ( March 15), about
development of cloned pigs to improve pig-to-human transplantation.

   It is worth pointing out cloning will not reduce the risk of endogenous virus
release when pig organs are transplanted to humans. Work on pig-to-human
transplants was slowed when unique viruses associated with the pig genome were
released and infected human cells when pig cells contacted human cells. The
endogenous viruses cannot be reduced by growing pigs in a germ-free environment.
The pig-to-baboon transplants cannot be used to evaluate pig virus release
because pig cells do not release endogenous virus when they contact baboon
cells.

   In recent months, gene therapy (curing disease by implanting genes in humans)
has come under severe criticism because patients (some who died as a result of
the experimental treatment) were not fully informed of the risks of their
treatment. The main problem was the virus vectors used to implant the treatment
genes into human cells and tissues produced injurious side-effects.

   None of the hundreds of trials done over a decade succeeded and many injured.
In at least one case, where a young patient was in no immediate danger from his
illness, the patient died as a result of a gene experiment. The matter has been
treated as a bureaucratic matter, not criminal negligence, and the researchers
and academic bureaucrats who promoted the risky procedure and the
less-than-truthful means of obtaining patient consent will face only minor
bureaucratic inconvenience.

   In both gene therapy and in pig-to-human transplantation, those profiting
from the risky procedures should face criminal charges when the procedures
injure or maim human experimental subjects who have not been truly appraised of
the risk.

   Pig-to-human transplantation not only threatens the patient but also the
world when unique viruses are released to the population.

LOAD-DATE: April 2, 2000


                              502 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Sun Media Corporation
                      London Free Press (Ontario, Canada)

                     March 31, 2000, Friday, Final EDITION

SECTION: ONWARD AND UPWARD, Pg. ED3

LENGTH: 731 words

HEADLINE: LONDON DOCS TOPS AT HI-TECH ROBOTICS

BYLINE: MARY-JANE EGAN, THE LONDON FREE PRESS

BODY:


   Robotics is revolutionizing health care and nowhere is its mind-boggling
potential more evident than in London.

   "We are so far out with robotics we have honestly stepped way in front of the
pack now," said London cardiac surgeon Doug Boyd who last year performed the
world's first cardiac bypass using a robot on a beating heart.

   It's the latest of years' worth of groundbreaking research that has carved
London a sterling reputation on the international health stage.

   Neurosurgery, organ transplants, genetic research, diabetes, premature birth,
prostate cancer -- just some medical areas bettered by London breakthroughs.

   It was last September when Zeus the robot, responding to voice commands from
Boyd, did the bypass on a Seaforth farmer.

   Since the six-hour operation at the London Health Sciences Centre, 20 more
have been done, erasing the need to crack the chest open, cutting recovery time
in half, saving money -- and attracting another $ 1.5 million US in research
money to London's robotics program, Boyd said.

   "Every day I get two or three e-mails from prominent surgeons all around the
world wanting to come here and do some robotics."

   The city doesn't intend to lose its competitive edge, Boyd said.

   London is sitting on $ 20 million in federal grant applications to establish
a national centre for robotic surgery here and the city "is extremely well
positioned to be that centre," Boyd said.

   Among the proposals:

   - Set up a centre for robot-assisted anti-cancer therapy with faultless
accuracy thanks to London's world-class, three-dimensional imaging, giving
cancerous tumours fewer places to hide.

   Using the example of less invasive brachytherapy in which radioactive seeds
are implanted to destroy the tumour from within, Boyd said a robot can be
programmed to implant the hazardous material through a previously unimaginably
tiny incision without trauma to the patient.

   London was one of the first centres in the country in 1998 to use
brachytherapy for early-stage prostate cancer.

   - Set up a London-based telesurgery project linked with the Ottawa Heart
Institute.

   Using a fibre-optic Internet network and satellite links, local specialists
would be able to help other surgeons in video-guided surgery from London.

   "If a surgeon in Ottawa is placing a scope, he'll get the same view that I do
in my operating room, but I will have a joystick that enables me to move the
robotic arm around and a teleprompter so I can say 'Cut here' or 'Cut there,' "
Boyd said. "If we can do the surgery eight feet away, we should be able to do it
80 feet away or eight miles or 800 miles."

   The California-based company that designed the three-armed Zeus is building
London a world prototype robot system to make remote surgery a reality.

   - Set up a robotic fetal surgery program to combine London's strengths in
maternal and fetal care with genetic manipulation.

   "We have two very powerful research groups here and we plan to miniaturize
equipment so we can operate in utero" (with the baby still in the womb)," Boyd
said. One "interesting thing about operating in utero is when the baby is born,
they have no scars."

   Boyd also envisions incorporating London's genome group, a move that would
permit administering gene therapies robotically to an unborn child.

   - Develop a coronary suite where heart patients would get an angiogram to
diagnose blockages in arteries supplying blood to the head and neck; then
undergo catheter-based revascularization such as angioplasty; then
robot-assisted surgery on other vessels and, last, another angiogram to check
for an all-clear before being discharged -- all within 48 hours.

   "The plans are on the board, the funding has been set up and this will be a
reality here, we hope, within 12 to 18 months."

   Health centre president Tony Dagnone said the benefits of robotic surgery
require a "quantum leap" in the mindset of both surgeons and patients.

   But he said London has a pivotal role to play in becoming a robotic teaching
centre that crosses all medical disciplines.

   Dagnone said London's expertise in the field makes it a natural leader and
teacher.

   "This is the wave of the future and we have to ride" it, he said. "We have to
seize these opportunities . . . It will put us in the front row and we'll get
the grants and we'll attract the brightest right here to London."

GRAPHIC: photo by Susan Bradnam, The London Free Press Dr. Doug Boyd and Dr.
Reiza Raymond, right, watch a monitor as they perform robot-assisted cardiac
bypass surgery.

LOAD-DATE: March 31, 2000


                              503 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                      March 30, 2000, Thursday, Edition 1

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 369 words

HEADLINE: RESEARCH FINDS ENZYME THAT'S KEY TO MAKING THE HEART SICK

BYLINE: Sonia Verma

BODY:

    in others
 A team of Toronto researchers say they've discovered how a virus
 that causes flu-like symptoms in most Canadians can lead to heart
 disease in others.

    Researchers from the University of Toronto say they've found the key enzyme
which a common virus - Coxsackie virus B3 - uses to attack the immune system and
heart tissue.

    The virus has been linked to chronic dilated cardiomyopathy, a common cause
of progressive heart disease, heart failure and sudden death.

    ''It's the first time we've found something that this virus needs to make a
heart sick," said Dr. Josef Penninger, an immunologist at the University of
Toronto who was involved in the study, published in the current issue of Nature
Medicine.

    ''This particular enzyme is the magic key the virus uses and so one could
now artificially find a way to change the lock," said Dr. Peter Liu, Head of the
Heart and Stroke Richard Lewar Centre of Excellence at the University of
Toronto, who investigated the virus with Penninger.

    Liu says his team's findings could lead to the development of gene therapy,
a vaccine or special screening tests to prevent heart disease. Researchers are
developing a vaccine to suppress the enzyme in humans.

    The idea that viruses and bacteria are linked to heart disease has been
known for years, Penninger says.

    About 70 per cent of Canadians are exposed to this particular virus. Most
suffer from flu-like symptoms.

    But the virus has been linked to heart failure in about 50,000 Canadians.

    The virus attaches to the enzyme p561ck to enter and reproduce in immune
cells and weaken the heart muscle to cause heart failure, the researchers say.

    The researchers found when the virus was injected into wild mice, which
produce the enzyme, about half died from heart failure.

    When the virus was injected in mice lacking the enzyme, all remained
healthy.

    The three-year study was sponsored by the Heart and Stroke Foundation of
Ontario.

    More than 333,000 Canadians and more than 4 million Americans suffer from
heart disease.

    ''This research isn't a magic bullet," warned Liu.

    The researcher added that people need to stop smoking, eat properly and
exercise.


LOAD-DATE: March 30, 2000


                              504 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Sun Media Corporation
                      London Free Press (Ontario, Canada)

                     March 27, 2000, Monday, Final EDITION

SECTION: LIFESTYLE, Pg. C4

LENGTH: 283 words

HEADLINE: CAUTION URGED IN GENE THERAPY

BYLINE: MAGGIE FOX, REUTERS

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:


   Closer monitoring and slower approval of gene therapy trials are needed to
help make them safer and restore confidence shattered by the death of a teenage
patient, says one scientist.

   And researchers who have financial interests in the outcome of trials -- such
as those who have set up private companies to develop and exploit any successful
therapies -- should not take part in experiments, said Dr. Ted Friedmann,
director of the program in human gene therapy at the University of California
San Diego.

   Friedmann, a member of a committee at the National Institutes of Health that
helps regulate gene therapy trials, also thinks his committee should be the
first stop in the process of approving new gene therapy experiments.

   Gene therapy is a promising new field that involves introducing new genes
into a patient's body to correct a defect or disease. No one has been cured yet,
but some experiments are showing a hint of efficacy.

   However, last September, Jesse Gelsinger, 18, died during a trial meant to
correct a rare liver deficiency. In the furore that followed, it became clear
that many researchers were not following procedures for reporting problems and
for enrolling patients in trials.

   "These events suggest that the gene therapy community has not fully succeeded
in developing mechanisms to ensure the highest possible quality of clinical
research in this vital new field of medicine," Friedmann wrote in the journal
Science.

   The U.S. Food and Drug Administration and the U.S. Congress are considering
new rules for gene therapy trials, and several experiments, including trials at
the University of Pennsylvania where Gelsinger died, have been suspended.

LOAD-DATE: March 27, 2000


                              508 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                      March 16, 2000, Thursday, Edition 1

SECTION: BUSINESS

LENGTH: 633 words

HEADLINE: BIOTECH COMPANIES AFFECTED DIFFERENTLY BY OWNERSHIP ISSUE

BODY:



    analysts maintain

    Madhavi Acharya Canadian and American biotechnology companies are still
reeling
 in the wake of statements Tuesday by U.S. President Bill Clinton
 and British Prime Minister Tony Blair suggesting human gene
 research should be accessible to the public for free.

    The statement, as well intentioned as it may have been, has huge
implications for companies that have spent millions of dollars and countless
resources, said John Goudey, partner at Ernst & Young and business adviser in
the life science industry.

    ''How do the people who developed the technology get the financial reward
for taking the risk?"

    Companies that use the gene research to develop therapies and products - as
opposed to those that focus on gene mapping - stand to gain if the information
is made public.

    ''At the end of the day, it's going to be the products that the biotech
companies create that will validate the sector, at least with the investment
community," said Ken Galbraith, executive vice-president of Vancouver-based QLT
Phototherapeutics Inc., which would benefit from free access.

    Investors who have recently enjoyed gains as companies race to patent DNA
coding are heading for cover after the politicians' comments. The United States
and Britain head the world's biggest research project on genetic science.

    The multi-billion-dollar Human Genome Project, begun in 1990, would produce
a kind of biological roadmap of a sequence of 100,000 human genes, which
determine everything from eye colour and complexion to the likelihood of
developing cancer or heart disease.

    While U.S. and British scientists are set to unveil a rough draft of the
project this spring, its completion is still years away.

    Scientists receiving government grants for their work already post their
gene sequence discoveries on the Internet, while private firms patent their
findings and charge others to examine them.

    Pundits expect that biotechnology will be the ''it" sector of the coming
decade, even bigger than the current information technology revolution.

    The potential is enormous, from cloning techniques that could stem the food
shortages and provide human organs for transplant to gene therapy that would
predict and cure disease long before symptoms arise.

    This week's stock market volatility largely amounted to an overreaction by
skittish investors, market watchers say. The Nasdaq Stock Market's biotech index
was up about 11.5 per cent yesterday after falling nearly 13 per cent the day
before. Over-all, the index is still up more than 100 per cent since last fall.

    While some U.S. biotechnology stocks recovered yesterday, Canadian firms,
including two Quebec-based companies that are involved in gene mapping, did not
fare as well.

    Genomics One Corp. lost $1.50 to $16.50 while Signalgene Inc. lost 15 cents
to $3.20.

    Even science and technology companies not involved in gene exploration saw
their stock prices slide.

    Vasogen Inc. slipped 70 cents to $11.80. Lorus Therapeutics Inc. plunged as
much as $1.45 to $4.05 before recovering to $5.55, a gain of 5 cents. The
company issued a statement to investors yesterday morning that its activities
have nothing to do with gene mapping.

    ''When it's momentum money, people are usually not that discriminating
between companies," said Subodh Kumar, chief portfolio strategist at CIBC World
Markets Inc.

    The two leaders said in a statement Tuesday they want data discovered by
Celera Genomics Group and other companies to be freely available to other
scientists.

    They made the remarks a week after partnership talks between Celera Genomics
and researchers working on the publicly funded Human Genome Project appeared to
fall apart.

    With files from The Star's wire services


LOAD-DATE: March 16, 2000


                              524 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Sun Media Corporation
                      London Free Press (Ontario, Canada)

                    February 6, 2000, Sunday, Final EDITION

SECTION: THE LONDONER, Pg. C1

LENGTH: 2519 words

HEADLINE: MAGNIFICENT MIGGSIE LOATH TO BLOW HER OWN HORN, TIRELESS FUND-RAISER
MIGGSIE LAWSON IS ONE OFLONDON'S MOST GENEROUS CITIZENS

BYLINE: KELLEY TEAHEN, SPECIAL TO THE LONDONER

BODY:


   Trying to catch Miggsie Lawson for a talk about her philanthropic fame is
like trying to catch a hummingbird -- perhaps because she moves, talks and acts
with the speed of that tiny, whirling creature.

   And she acts most rapidly when London needs her, though to hear her tell it,
she has done nothing remarkable.

   "I've just been a housewife all my life," the energetic 82-year-old says,
waving her hand in front of her face as if to obscure it from a pointing camera.
"It's my husband who has the Order of Canada."

   That husband of 53 years was Col. Tom Lawson, military leader, entrepreneur,
and philanthropic Mr. London who donated $ 1 million for a new aquatic centre,
was the supporting founder of the Royal Canadian Big Band Music Festival to
honour Londoner Guy Lombardo, and championed the restoration of Banting House,
now a national historic site.

   He set the Lawson Foundation, founded by his father Ray Lawson, on track to
become Canada's 31st largest charitable foundation, with assets of $ 47 million
and annual grants of $ 2.6 million. Before his death in 1991, he was honoured
for helping a vast array of causes, from Huron College to the Salvation Army to
medical research at the Lawson Research Institute.

   But, as long-time friend Nancy McNee points out, "who moulded a hard-nosed
pragmatic businessman into a generous patron of good causes and intuitive social
planner? I submit it was his wife. I know she educated Tom and led and
encouraged him in these endeavours. She did the research, and found the needy
causes."

   She's done nothing extraordinary, Miggsie Lawson insists, seeing the heroic
everywhere but in her own mirror.

   While "Col. Tom" as he was often called, was the public face of the family's
generosity, Miggsie worked in the background. She has served on many committees
and groups, including the board of the London district branch of the Canadian
Diabetes Association. Fellow board member Justice John Seneshen remembers her as
"a fantastic force. She doesn't push herself, but she's one of the ideas
people."

   It's an observation echoed by John Davidson, whose campaign to raise money
for gene-therapy research has been generously supported by Miggsie.

   "She loves to talk about her family, and is surrounded by all those photos
and remembrances of them (at her home), but when you get away from that, she
talks about ideas. She asks you, 'what do you think about this idea? How could
we get so-and-so involved in this?' "

   The Lawsons's long-standing commitment to diabetes research is rooted in a
family tragedy. Tom and Miggsie's fourth child, Frannie, was diagnosed with a
severe form of diabetes at age seven and died in 1957 at age 22.

   After having lost her child to a disease with no cure, she identifies deeply
with John and Sherene Davidson, whose son, Jesse, has Duchenne muscular
dystrophy, a progressive and fatal genetic disease

   She first got involved in their cause through connections to Sherene, whose
mother, Doris Sifton, is a Lawson family friend.

   "I saw the videos the family made when Jesse went to the U.S. seeking
treatment," Miggsie recalls. "It was such a gripping story. Heart-wrenching.
They were trying to find a cure to save him, before (the disease) had progressed
too far."

   When she backs a cause, she rarely stops at writing a cheque. When Davidson
walked across Canada to raise money in Jesse's Journey: A Father's Tribute,
Miggsie pledged $ 1,000 for every provincial border he crossed -- and phoned to
congratulate him whenever he reached one. Then she flew to Victoria to cheer
Davidson's final steps.

   "I kept looking out the plane window and thinking, 'He walked that. He walked
it,' " she says. "It haunts me, what he would do for his son."

   "She gives such moral support," says Michelle Campbell, director of Parkwood
Hospital Foundation, which honoured Miggsie Lawson's volunteerism and
philanthropy in 1996.

   "She came to the brunch . . . after John returned from Victoria and was a
walking poster girl for Jesse's Journey. She had the T-shirt, the ball cap. She
couldn't wait to see John get to the podium. She was such a cheerleader -- all
she was missing were the pompoms."

   Jane Cunningham, retired executive director of the diabetes association,
calls Miggsie a little hummingbird. "She's just a bundle of energy. I don't know
how she does it."

   If anything, she's sped up as she's aged, says son Tom Lawson, of Grand Bend.
"At a social event, now, she's practically spinning around, to see if everyone
else is having a good time."

   She talks fast. She drives her fire-engine red Chrysler Sebring convertible-
- with vanity plates reading MIGSIE -- fast. She loves bright red clothes. She
plays tennis and badminton for their speed, and hates golf "because I don't have
the patience to follow that little white ball around the course." She snaps off
fast, funny quips and is an enthusiastic hugger.

   You'd think all this wit, cheer and energy would make it easy for her to say
a few words at a public event to support a cause she loves.

   No way, never, no thank you -- as she would say, in her rapid-fire way.

   At the 1996 Parkwood dinner, she refused to speak before the several hundred
guests. Son Tom spoke for her.

   "It goes back to my parents' years of marriage and Tom Senior was always . .
. out in front," says the younger Tom. "She just doesn't want a big fuss and she
doesn't want to be in the limelight."

   Miggsie agreed to be interviewed by The Londoner only after friends and
family convinced her a story would draw attention to the Feb. 12 London
Firefighters Valentine's Gala at the Hilton Hotel. She's honourary chairperson
for the event, which is raising money for John Davidson's cause, gene-therapy
research.

   "I'm the honourary," she quips. "I really don't do anything."

   But, in true Miggsie Lawson style, she worked her phone to round up several
tables of gala-goers for the event, a revival of the Firefighter's Ball.
Organizer Sean Beer estimates at least 80 of the 400 $ 85 tickets sold three
weeks before the gala could be traced back to a Miggsie invite.

   She may be one of London's wealthiest citizens and may give generously to
others, but she's frugal with her household spending. She closes half her large
home in winter "because it costs the world to heat this whole place" and shops
at Zellers, where she collects Club Z points -- much to the amusement of her
grown children. "We kid her about going to Zellers," says son Tom. "She wasn't
happy when the one on Wonderland Road near her closed."

   She donates buckets of money to causes promoting good health, faithfully
attends exercise classes -- but at age 82 still smokes up storm clouds of
Marlboro cigarettes.

   She won't take no for an answer -- just ask any of the hundreds of people who
have attended events or volunteered at her insistence -- but is shocked when
people ask her to accept an honour, or take on a position that might draw
attention.

   Miggsie, born Margaret Anna Otton in 1917, was one of two children of George
and Constance Otton of Woodstock. George built pipe organs for a living.
Constance, who received a bachelor of arts degree from Western in 191 * -- a
rarity for a woman in those days -- later became the first woman to head the
Woodstock board of education.

   "My mother loved her reading club and her bridge," Miggsie says. "I remember
her reading Dickens."

   Constance's passed her fierce devotion to higher education on to her
daughter. Contemporaries recall Margaret Otton as a star student at Woodstock
Collegiate Institute, one teachers would cite as an example to others.

   She and Tom Lawson first crossed paths in her teen years, when Margaret was
invited to a coming-out party at a family friend's home in London.

   "We had one dance and I thought, 'Hey, I'd like some more,' " she says, blue
eyes sparkling and mouth curling into a sly smile.

   Around this time, also thanks to Tom, Margaret became Miggsie.

   She started studying French and German at Western at 17, living at Alpha
House on Ridout Street and dreaming of being a translator and travelling the
world.

   Tom and Miggsie were engaged in 1938, even though that meant Miggsie never
finished the final year of her studies. She embraced the decision then, but now
seems to regret not completing the degree. She talks enthusiastically about a
UWO alumni lecture series she attends faithfully, "even though I'm not a
graduate."

   It was a romantic match. For their honeymoon, the couple travelled first to
New York -- where they danced to Guy Lombardo's orchestra -- then to Bermuda,
later a sentimental favourite vacation spot for the Lawson clan.

   Longtime friends say the two were devoted to each other. In their early
years, they celebrated "month-a-versaries" -- giving each other a card, a rose,
or another remembrance on the 10th of each month, commemorating their Sept. 10
wedding.

   Being married to Tom and raising a family became Miggsie's full-time
occupation. Connie was born in 1939. Six more children followed: Joan, Tom,
Frannie, Marilyn, Tim and Peter.

   After his Second World War service, Tom plunged headlong into learning the
ropes at Lawson and Jones, the family printing and packaging firm.

   The Lawsons lived at 218 Cheapside St., the first of three houses they
occupied on that street before 1950, when they moved to Woodholme, a castle-like
estate on Wonderland Road that Miggsie still calls home.

   Tom's father, Ray Lawson, had bought the 65-hectare farm in 1920 from the
Shaw-Wood family, who built Woodholme in the late 1800s.

   Author Nancy Tausky calls Woodholme "an 18th-century folly built in the late
19th century out of poured concrete . . . its design was meant to suggest the
combination of ruins, fortifications and tacked-on additions that come with
centuries of use."

   From a distance, the three-storey home set far back from Wonderland looks
grey and formidable. Much like Miggsie, its quirkly charm is revealed up close:
the grey walls are dappled with brilliant chunks of blue, red, orange and green
glass.

   People involved in charities across London say Miggsie adds bright colour to
their grey days with encouraging personal notes, calls, even cards or flowers at
Christmas or on birthdays.

   "I don't have a relationship with any other donor like the one I have with
Miggsie," says Parkwood's Campbell. "She is one of the warmest, most spirited
women I have ever met. I've got a file folder full of personally written notes
from Miggsie. She reminds me why I'm here, and what this community is all
about."

   Conservatory Canada, the new music academy formed three years ago by the
merger of the Western Ontario Conservatory and the Alberta-based Western Board
of Music, granted Miggsie an honourary licentiate diploma -- a professional
music certification -- last November to recognize her support, which helped the
merger succeed.

   "She did provide financial assist- ance, " says principal Donald Cook, "but
it was more the personal encouragement we got from her, and congratulations."

   Nancy Ecclestone, director at the Centre for Activity and Aging at the former
Mount St. Joseph Academy, uses words such as "energetic," "enthusiastic,"
"wonderful," "bright," "caring" and "perceptive" to describe Miggsie, who visits
three times a week for a cardio-respiratory exercise class that includes weight
training.

   "There's a real social component to our programs and she's been a strong
support for many people," says Ecclestone, who includes herself on the list of
people Miggsie has helped.

   Very quietly, Miggsie has funded new programs at the centre, which serves 400
London seniors. "She does a lot of things no one knows about," says Ecclestone.

   Miggsie, a faithful churchgoer, attends early Sunday services at St. John the
Evangelist Anglican church in north London before driving to Woodlawn Cemetery
to visit the graves of her husband and daughter, Frannie.

   "I'm just, 'Hi kids, I'm here,' " she says, cocking her head and giving a
little salute.

   For the past six years, her Sunday routine has included late-morning coffee
with J. Allyn Taylor, longtime friend and business colleague of Col. Tom's.
Until Taylor's wife, Betty, died of Alzheimer's Disease in April 1999, Miggsie
would drive "Mr. T" to visit Betty at Meadowcroft nursing home.

   "It was a very wonderful thing for her to do and wonderfully thoughtful for
my wife," says Taylor, 92, who hasn't been able to drive for several years.

   "I could pick his brains to and from our visit," says Miggsie. "That was my
treat. He is so wise. He gave the homily at my husband's funeral and I've never
heard anything like it."

   As Miggsie has sorted through a sometimes overwhelming flood of requests for
charitable donations since her husband's death, her family has "tried to make
sure she has a bit of a protective barrier," son Tom says. She also seeks the
advice of friends such as Taylor before taking on a new project.

   "I look for what difference (a donation) will make," Miggsie says. "And I
like to see how the donation's being put to work, behind the scenes."

   Though family has always been central to her life, no Lawson children remain
in London. Tom's the closest in Grand Bend, Joan's in Toronto, Connie's in
Montreal, Marilyn's on Saltspring Island in B.C., Tim's in Langden, B.C., and
Peter divides his time between Alberta and Arizona.

   Miggsie, who boasts 18 grandchildren and 12 great-grandchildren, is
matter-of-fact about the breakups and remarriages that have reshaped her family.

   "My policy is no matter what, we've had open doors," she says.

   When Miggsie dies, the Lawson Foundation will inherit Woodholme and the
remaining eight hectares.

   Even the business, long partly owned by British interests and called the
Lawson Mardon Group, is out of Lawson hands. The family sold its last
25-per-cent stake in the early 1990s to Switzerland's Alusuisse Lonza, after a
1986 leveraged buyout took the company public and yearly sales jumped from $ 300
million to nearly $ 1 billion.

   London needs energy from newcomers if it's future is to be as rich as its
past, Miggsie says.

   She believes medical research "will help keep this city alive" and puts her
money where her belief is, personally supporting the Lawson Research Institute
and other local research efforts on top of grants from the family foundation.

   Miggsie enjoys reminiscing, whether it's about the time Prince Philip stayed
at Woodholme during a four-day visit marking the centennial of the Royal
Canadian Regiment in 1983, or good times spent at the family's cottage in Grand
Bend.

   But she doesn't live in the past, says John Davidson. "She's a
forward-thinking futurist. You'll talk to her and she'll say, 'Let's see where
this can take us.' "

   If Miggsie had her way, Davidson would be awarded the Order of Canada for his
fund-raising efforts. "I've written my letter," she says, squeezing her crossed
fingers for luck.

   But what about such honours for Margaret Otton Lawson?

   "No way!" she says, with a sharp shake of her head. "There are so many worthy
people. No way."

GRAPHIC: 6 photos 1. photo by Suzanne Bird, The London Free Press With the help
of an 1861 bugle, Miggsie Lawson trumpets her involvement as honourary
chairperson of the London Firefighters Valentine's Gala. The Feb. 12 event is a
fund-raiser for gene-therapy research.  2. photo by Derek Ruttan, The London
Free Press Miggsie Lawson loves her fire engine red convertible with vanity
plates that read MIGSIE.  3. photo by Derek Ruttan, The London Free Press
Miggsie Lawson at home with a 1935 photo of herself as a teenager at Southampton
beach.  4. photo by Suzanne Bird, The London Free Press Miggsie Lawson poses on
a London fire department engine to spread the news about the London Firefighters
Valentine's Gala.  5. photo by File Photo Miggsie Lawson unveils a bas relief of
her late daughter, Frances Ruth Lawson, at the 1994 opening of a Banting House
gallery in her name.  6. photo by File Photo Miggsie Lawson with her husband,
Col. Tom Lawson, in 1984.

LOAD-DATE: February 18, 2000


                              525 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                      February 6, 2000, Sunday, Edition 1

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 2165 words

HEADLINE: THE MIGHTY MOUSE

BODY:




    Mickey Mouse is a character known the world over. He's Michel
 Souris in France, Mikki Ma-u-su in Japan, Topolino in Italy and
 Raton Mickey in Mexico.


    The 21st century house mouse has developed an enduring underdog
 quality over the years. And the tradition continues in films like
 The Green Mile and Stuart Little, which already have grossed more
 than $100 million each.


    Vinay Menon For a tiny creature, known more for nocturnal squeaks and
 eliciting shrieks, the mouse has boldly invaded our culture.


    It has been rhapsodized in folklore, reviled during plagues. It figures
prominently in fables and legends. It played a sinister role in war. It helped
win a Pulitzer prize.

    It has led to medical discoveries and cures. Played a leading role in the
personal technology revolution. And through it all, the mouse has also triggered
anxiety and fear.

    ''It's really an amazing thing,'' says Robert Thompson, a professor at
Syracuse University and an author specializing in popular culture.

    ''When you look at the list of places the mouse has insinuated itself, deep
in the heart of western culture, there is a real sense that this little rodent
has managed to find itself in cultural places in which much greater beings have
failed.''

    The 21st century house mouse, or mus musculus, can trace its family tree
back to Europe and Asia. It was there, 10,000 years ago, that its
slithery-tailed ancestors hitched rides with human beings as they swept across
oceans and lands. Today, mice are both common and indigenous in every corner of
the globe.

    Before long, mice became a fixture in European folklore. Early stories
featured mice with magical skin that could instantly transform into other
creatures.

    ''Later you start to see stories in which there were many town-and-country
mice rivalries,'' says Marshall Fishwick, a professor of American Studies at
Virginia Tech.

    ''Through it all, mice were viewed as stronger than the elements, and braver
than other animals in the forest.''

    As M. Thomas Inge, a professor of humanities at Randolph-Macon College in
Virginia and author of the Handbook of American Popular Culture, observes: ''I
don't know another kind of animal that could replace the mouse in terms of what
it has meant to us in our culture.''

    With each appearance in art and literature, the mouse developed underdog
attributes that have endured.

    ''Being so small and vulnerable, mice have come to represent the less
fortunate among us, the little guy that has to struggle harder to survive,''
Inge says.

    This tradition continues with two current Hollywood films, The Green Mile
and Stuart Little, which dominated the box office and have already grossed more
than $100 million each.

    In 1992, Art Spiegelman's Maus, an illustrated book about his parents'
experience during the Holocaust, used mice to represent Jews and cats to portray
the Nazis. It became the first graphic novel to win a Pulitzer prize.

    Oddly enough, Mickey Mouse - the most famous of celluloid rodents - played a
shadowy role in World War II. During the Normandy invasion, military
intelligence used ''Mickey Mouse'' as a password.

    And during the Battle of the Bulge, when some German soldiers were wearing
U. S. Army uniforms to create havoc behind the Allied lines, one question asked
at road checkpoints was, ''Who is Mickey's girlfriend?'' If they didn't know the
answer, they were often arrested on suspicion of spying.

    '''Mickey had arisen to a position where he was assumed to be a living,
breathing American,'' Fishwick says.


    ''I only hope we never lose sight of one thing,'' Walt Disney once said.
''That it all started with a mouse.''

    Today, Mickey's silhouette ears are recognized across the planet. In France,
he is known as Michel Souris. The Japanese call him Mikki Ma-u-su. In Mexico,
it's Raton Mickey, while in Finland he's Mikki Hirri. In Italy, he's Topolino
and in Spain, Miguel Rantoncito.

    ''Sometimes I've tried to figure out why Mickey appealed to the whole world,
'' Disney said. ''Everybody's tried to figure it out. So far as I know, nobody
has.''

    With his falsetto voice and shaky body language, Mickey debuted in 1928 with
Steamboat Willie, the first cartoon with synchronized sound. He would appear in
more than 130 cartoons and films over the next couple of decades.

    In a letter to shareholders last month, Michael Eisner, Disney's chief
executive, said the company was poised to launch its first national television
advertising campaign to promote a new line of Mickey-themed apparel.

    Mickey is now a septuagenarian in a culture that reveres its young, a
culture in which celebrity is ever-changing. No matter. He remains an ageless
icon, a touchstone of days long gone. A simple drawing that captured the
sensibilities of postwar America.

    Says Inge: ''In a profound way, Mickey is greatly responsible for uses of
the mouse that followed.''


    On Chapters.ca, there are 739 books with ''mouse'' in the title. A similar
search on Amazon.com turns up 1,697 titles. Visit the Internet Movie Database
and a ''mouse'' search uncovers 139 movies, four television movies, and nine
television series.

    Some important animated mice include Jerry, of Tom and Jerry fame; Mighty
Mouse (also the nickname of ex-Raptor Damon Stoudamire); Basil from The Great
Mouse Detective; and Fievel Mousekewitz, the Russian- Jewish mouse from An
American Tail; and Ignatz, the first movie-star mouse, featured in the
comic-strip-inspired Krazy Kat and the Ignatz Mouse.

    For the most part, mouse characters have reflected the spirit of the times.
The Simpsons, for example, has satirized the cat-and-mouse canon with The Itchy
and Scratchy Show, its subversive and deliberately violent toon-within- a-toon.

    In 1988, CBS cut a three-second segment of Mighty Mouse: The New Adventures
after media watchdog groups complained the clip depicted cocaine use. Once
again, the mouse had achieved celebrity status, and this time its behaviour was
fodder for heated public debate.

    As a celebrity, the mouse benefits from several marketing strengths, says
Irving Rein, professor of communication studies at Northwestern University and a
specialist in celebrity culture.

    ''I think the mouse stands for a kind of wholesome cuddliness, almost an
Americana.''

    It's an interesting contradiction, says Thompson. ''It's really kind of odd
. . . The mouse we encounter in daily life is almost always in an unpleasant
situation.

    ''You sure don't want these things in your house. And when you do find them,
you either scream and stand on a chair or you buy traps that break their backs
and inflict horrible deaths.''

    Biologically, mice are mammals. One pair can produce up to 15,000 offspring
in a year. In any 12-month period, a single mouse can leave about 18,000
droppings. It can devour up to 40 meals a day. And it can squeeze through a
space the size of a nickel.

    ''We have gotten away from the animal as an actual animal,'' Rein says.
''The mouse has been transformed . . . from a real mouse to a symbol and
collection of images that can be easily marketed.''


    ''There is something strange about the mouse,'' offers Christopher Dewdney,
a professor of cultural studies at York University and author of Last Flesh:
Life in the Transhuman Era.

    ''We identify with them, in a certain sense, because they are an icon of all
that is mammalian in our evolutionary history.'' As a result, there is a species
affinity. Dewdney says the mouse is embedded in our subconscious.

    One of his friends recently had a dream in which he was holding his new
baby. He let the child down to play and the child suddenly turned into a mouse
and scurried away.

    ''There is a very strong unconscious correlation between mice and babies,''
he says. ''We have cohabited with mice as long as we have had villages.''

    This inextricable bond may also explain, in part, our fear and anxiety.


    Neil Rector, head of the anxiety disorders clinic at the Centre For
Addiction and Mental Health, says mice phobias fall within the broader category
of animal phobias.

    Recent studies suggest that between 12 and 18 per cent of North Americans
have an animal phobia. One U.S. study estimated the fear of mice, or musophobia,
is third most common fear among Americans (behind public speaking and visiting
the dentist).

    ''What is unique about mice, and a number of theorists have talked about
this, is the 'preparedness of fear,' '' Rector says. ''That we are probably
biologically hard-wired to fear certain objects.

    ''And typically the objects are ones that were threatening to our survival
in the past.''

    High anxiety also exists because, historically, the mouse has been no
stranger to death and disease, mayhem and madness. For centuries, it has been
linked to plagues and scourges.

    Each year, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration destroys 400,000 tonnes of
food that has been contaminated by rodent droppings. The deer mouse carries the
hantavirus. And various other mice can transmit more than 40 diseases, including
salmonella and Lyme disease.


    The fact is that one day, millions of people may owe their lives to the
humble mouse.

    For decades, mice have been a mainstay in medical research. They have been
used to study diseases such as leprosy, diabetes, cancer, Alzheimer, mad cow
disease and hemophilia.

    In fact, mice and humans share about 97 per cent of the same genetic makeup,
making them an almost perfect test vehicle. ''Mice get a lot of the same
diseases we get,'' says Karen Rader, professor of science, technology and
society at Sarah Lawrence College in New York.

    Rader says mice have played a crucial role in medical research. Especially
after recombinant-DNA work in the early 1970s changed the prototypical lab mouse
and allowed scientists to control genetic variables.

    Mice also reproduce quickly and are inexpensive to house. As such, they are
often the first subjects used in medical testing, especially for genetic
research.

    ''The mouse offers us a very unique opportunity,'' says Dr. Geraldine Kent,
director of Laboratory Animal Services at The Hospital for Sick Children.
''Because it is a species in which we have been able to manipulate the genes.

    ''The mouse is the key to unraveling everything we know about how genes and
proteins function and work together.''

    In order to test new gene therapies, companies like Medarex have created
strains of mice that have 100 per cent human antibodies. Licensed to
pharmaceutical companies in order to test and create drugs, Medarex's patented
HuMAb mice are engineered so that they have human antibody-making genes instead
of mouse genes, thereby opening up new clinical possibilities.

    Last September, scientists engineered smarter mice by inserting an extra
gene.  In recent years, other research and work with mice has led to findings in
spinal cord research, cholesterol, aging, blood pressure and strokes.

    In 1965, there were approximately 37 million mice used in medical
experiments in the United States. By 1984, that number had jumped to more than
45 million.

    In 1965, rodents accounted for 67 per cent of all animals used for research.
Thirty years later, that figure surged to 92 per cent.

    ''Mice sit on this border socially and culturally where they are enough like
us that scientists feel they can learn something meaningful,'' Rader says. ''But
they are not so much like us that they cause and ethical problems.''

    In the past thirty years, the mouse has joined the wired world.

    As a computer pointing device, it has influenced the way we interact with an
ever-broadening range of personal technology products.

    Invented by Douglas Engelbart of the Stanford Research Centre, the computer
mouse was developed in the 1960s and unveiled at a show in 1968.

    ''It was nicknamed the mouse because the tail came out,'' Engelbart said in
1997, after accepting the $500,000 (U.S.) Lemelson-MIT Prize for inventing the
mouse.

    Despite years of use at an industrial level, the mouse made its first real
consumer splash in 1984, when Apple launched the Macintosh.

    ''The whole user-interface style, of which the mouse is one component, has
obviously been a very significant invention in computing because it has made
possible the kind of product an average, non-computer expert can use,'' says
Graeme Hirst, a professor of computer science at the University of Toronto.

    ''The idea of being able to point something on a screen and indicate it by
clicking on it is a very powerful idea.''


    ''Maybe Shakespeare had it, with this mice-and-men situation,'' Thompson
says.  ''There are two ends of the spectrum of existence. Men are at the top of
it and mice are at the bottom.

    ''And you never know how far you can fall, never know where you might be but
for the grace of God. The mouse is a constant reminder of how low we can go.''


GRAPHIC: HIGH-TECH RODENT:
 The computer mouse, which was developed in the 1960s, got its name because
''the tail came out,'' says inventor Douglas Engelbart.

LOAD-DATE: February 6, 2000


                              527 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                      February 4, 2000, Friday, Edition 1

SECTION: LIFE

LENGTH: 311 words

HEADLINE: DEAD TEEN WASN'T TOLD OF RISKS IN GENE THERAPY

BODY:



    WASHINGTON (AP) - The father of a teenager who died after being injected
with experimental genes says he and his son were not informed of the true risks
and the serious side effects that could be caused by the treatment.

    Paul Gelsinger of Tucson said that before he let his son participate in a
gene therapy experiment, he was not told that a monkey had died in a similar
experiment and that another patient had had serious side effects.

    Gelsinger's son, 18-year-old Jesse, died at the University of Pennsylvania
in September after being injected with genes designed to correct an inherited
liver disease. Jesse was recruited for the experiment because he was born with
ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency syndrome, a liver disorder.

    ''It looked safe. It was presented as being safe,'' Gelsinger testified
Wednesday at a Senate subcommittee hearing. ''Since it would benefit everybody,
I encouraged my son to do this.

    ''I was misled,'' he added. ''That's what hurt the most.''

    Jesse Gelsinger went into a coma and died within hours, becoming the first
patient whose death was directly linked to experimental gene therapy.

    The testimony came in a hearing investigating patient safety in gene therapy
clinical trials and whether there is a need for more vigorous supervision of the
trials by the government.

    The hearing follows reports that some researchers have failed to tell the
National Institutes of Health about some serious health conditions experienced
by patients taking part in gene therapy trials.

    Dr. Amy Patterson, head of an NIH office that oversees gene therapy, said
there have been 691 serious problems, but only 39 had been reported to the NIH
within the time required by the regulations. Patterson said that the agency was
aware of the other 652, ''but they were not reported in a timely way to the
NIH.''


LOAD-DATE: February 4, 2000


                              533 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                      January 25, 2000, Tuesday, Edition 1

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 125 words

HEADLINE: GROW-YOUR-OWN BYPASSES PREDICTED

BODY:

    WASHINGTON (Reuters) - Gene therapy is being used experimentally
 to help patients grow their own heart bypasses, but it might also
 be used to help make conventional bypasses work better,
 researchers say.


    A team at Britain's University of Bristol said yesterday their gene therapy
helped stop blockages from growing in the newly grafted arteries.

    It has worked in live pigs, researchers wrote in the American Heart
Association journal, Circulation.

    ''This study shows the potential of this type of gene therapy for
re-blockage of vessels following bypass surgery,'' said study leader Sarah
George.

    The therapy is said to suppress a molecule that encourages cell
overproduction and destroy cells when a blockage starts.


LOAD-DATE: January 25, 2000


                              537 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                     January 15, 2000, Saturday, Edition 1

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 468 words

HEADLINE: GENES CLONED FOR TRIAL HEART TREATMENTS

BODY:

    therapy

    Tanya Talaga Researchers at St. Michael's Hospital are cloning healthy human

 cardiac genes in the lab and implanting them in diseased human
 hearts in an attempt to foster new blood vessel growth.

    The hospital's program is the first cardiac gene therapy trial on humans in
Canada, said Dr. Duncan Stewart, head of the cardiology division at St.
Michael's.

    ''The implications of this work are far-ranging,'' Stewart said yesterday.
''If cardiac gene therapy works . . . this provides a new source of hope for
patients who have heart disease but currently can't be helped by bypass and
balloon angioplasty procedures.''

    Toronto real estate agent Grenville Dungey, 52, was the first person in
Canada to receive this cutting-edge gene therapy injection while having a
quadruple bypass operation last month.

    ''This concept of new blood vessels growing in the heart to replace damaged
or blocked arteries . . . is really time in a bottle,'' said Bill Macleod,
acting chief executive officer at St. Michael's.

    Dungey's arteries were severely blocked and standard bypass surgery could
help only part of his heart.

    Cardiovascular surgeon Dr. David Latter performed the bypass a month ago,
and gave Dungey the injections toward the end of the surgery.

    ''The idea is this protein will stimulate new growth of vessels to bring in
the needed blood supply to the area that I cannot bypass directly,'' Latter
said.

    ''It is hoped the gene therapy will stimulate the growth of new blood
vessels into the region of the starved muscles, in effect, accomplishing a
biological bypass of the diseased artery,'' he said.

    The process of growing new blood vessels, known as angiogenesis, has only
been performed on about 50 people in the United States, Latter said.

    It is too early to say whether the new therapy is helping Dungey, who will
undergo a series of tests to assess his recovery.

    ''I am happy to report Mr. Dungey is making an excellent recovery,'' Latter
said.

    ''How much of his recovery is due to the effect of the gene therapy? I don't
know. It's something we'll be looking at closely with follow-up assessments, he
added.''

    Dungey said he is proud to be the hospital's guinea pig.

    ''Knowing the bypass wouldn't give me 100 per cent and this could give me
the option for a better lifestyle, I took the chance,'' he said. ''Somebody has
to go first.

    ''There are lots of people . . . that will get an option they never had
before,'' he said.

    If this study shows the first patients appear to benefit from the injected
genetic material, then larger, controlled human trials will be performed at St.
Michael's, Stewart said.

    The hospital has also received permission to start a trial using a catheter
to pump the gene treatment to the heart.


GRAPHIC: TORONTO STAR STAFF
 REGENERATING HEART:
 Two members of the medical team, Dr. Duncan Stewart, left, and Dr. David
Latter, centre, of St. Michael's Hospital, pose with patient Grenville Dungey,
right. Dungey is recovering well from surgery, but the effects of the gene
therapy remain unknown.

LOAD-DATE: January 15, 2000


                              541 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Sun Media Corporation
                      London Free Press (Ontario, Canada)

                    January 14, 2000, Friday, Final EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. A6

LENGTH: 458 words

HEADLINE: DOCTORS AIM FOR 'SQUADS' OF CLONES

BYLINE: CP

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:


   Scientists said yesterday they had cloned a monkey -- the first non-human
primate to be cloned -- in an experiment they hope will result in squads of
genetically identical lab animals perfect for use in testing.

   Tetra, a bright-eyed rhesus macaque, was not created by the same method used
by Scottish researchers that left the world agog over Dolly the sheep.

   While Dolly was cloned using nuclear transfer -- taking the nucleus out of an
adult cell and using it to reprogram an unfertilized egg -- Tetra was made by
splitting a very early embryo into four pieces.

   "The birth of Tetra, a healthy female cloned from a quarter of an embryo,
proves that this approach can result in live offspring," the researchers at the
Oregon Regional Primate Research Center in Beaverton wrote in the journal
Science.

   The method is commonly used in animals such as cattle but had never before
been used to create a monkey.

   The method has been used to create clones of human embryos at least once. In
1993, a doctor said he had cloned human embryos by splitting them, but later
destroyed them.

   Gerald Schatten, who led the Oregon research, said the technique copies what
nature does. "This is just artificial twinning," he said.

   Schatten said the goal is to produce identical monkeys that could be used to
perfect new therapies for human disease.

   Most medical therapies are now first tested in mice, but monkeys would be
more reliable in developing daring new techniques such as gene therapy or
growing new organs from stem cells, said Schatten.

   "It is a huge leap from a mouse to a patient," said Schatten. "The monkeys
could fill that scientific gap.

   "Medical research needs to have healthy, genetically identical animals so
cures can be perfected before they are tested on humans."

   In their research, Schatten and his colleagues created monkey embryos in the
laboratory by combining sperm and egg. When the embryos grew to an eight-cell
stage, they were each split into four parts, with each part containing two
cells. These were then nurtured into new embryos.

   In effect, he said, the single embryo became four embryos, all genetically
identical. The new embryos were then implanted into the uteruses of different
mothers.

   In the first test of the technique, the researchers produced a single animal,
named Tetra. A twin to Tetra was implanted, but miscarried.

   Now, said Schatten, four mother monkeys are pregnant with cells taken from
two separate embryos. Three of the mothers were implanted with two unrelated
embryo splits and the fourth mother was impregnated with a single embryo split.

   Schatten said it will not be known until May, when the animals are born,
which of the split embryos are developing into infants.

GRAPHIC: photo by AP Researchers using a technique called embryo splitting have
produced a living rhesus monkey, a female named Tetra, shown in this undated
photo.

LOAD-DATE: January 14, 2000


                              542 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                      January 14, 2000, Friday, Edition 1

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 280 words

HEADLINE: TWINNED MONKEYS OFFER HOPE FOR RESEARCH

BODY:

    ATLANTA (AP) - Researchers using embryo splitting hope to grow
 genetically identical rhesus moneys in the laboratory - a
 breakthrough that would enable experiments such as growing new
 organs from stem cells to be tested on monkeys rather than mice.

    The technique has so far produced only one living rhesus monkey, a female
named Tetra, but professor Gerald Schatten said that four more twinned infants
are on the way.

    Schatten, a researcher at the Oregon Health Sciences University in Portland,
said the goal is to produce identical monkeys that could be used to perfect new
therapies for human disease. The study appears today in the journal Science.

    Most medical therapies are now first tested in mice, but monkeys - closer to
human biology - would be more reliable in developing daring new techniques such
as gene therapy or growing new organs from stem cells, said Schatten.

    ''Medical research needs to have healthy, genetically identical animals so
cures can be perfected before they are tested on humans,'' he said.

    In their research, Schatten and his colleagues created monkey embryos in the
laboratory by combining sperm and egg. When the embryos grew to an eight- cell
stage, they were each split into four parts, with each part containing two
cells. These were then nurtured into new embryos.

    The new embryos were then implanted into the uteruses of different mothers.

    In the first test of the technique, the researchers produced a single
animal, named Tetra.

    A twin to Tetra was implanted, but miscarried.

    Now, said Schatten, four mother monkeys are pregnant with cells taken from
two separate embryos.


LOAD-DATE: January 14, 2000


                              543 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                     January 13, 2000, Thursday, Edition 1

SECTION: LIFE

LENGTH: 1173 words

HEADLINE: SHOPPING IN THE GRAY ZONE

BYLINE: David Graham

BODY:




    colours



    LIFE WRITER

    Andre de Montigny has an orange lawn.

    At least that's the way he sees it.

    The 36-year-old fax consultant for Xerox has been getting his colours
confused all his life.

    It's not so much a disability as a lifelong nuisance, he says.

    And as most colour deficient men will tell you, shopping for clothes
presents the biggest challenge.

    Even for men who see colours clearly, the task of connecting the right shirt
to the right tie can be tricky business. But for colour deficient men the burden
of building a complete wardrobe can be daunting.

    Many choose to confine themselves to a familiar zone of colours, ones they
can distinguish - mix and match.

    Toronto fashion designer Daniel Storto sticks to basic black in his own
wardrobe and in the designs he creates.

    ''On the rare occasions when I delve into colour it's a bit of a potluck,''
he says. ''It gets a little tricky when I have to choose thread because the
match has to be right on. I've been faking it for a long time.''

    But he keeps his sense of humour.

    ''The fact is, buying bananas is the real nightmare. I can never tell if
they're ripe or not.''

    De Montigny recalls his childhood wardrobe was labelled by his mother so he
could match his clothes.

    ''My mother ruled until I was in high school,'' he says.

    But by Grade 9 he no longer wanted the telltale tags.

    He wanted to assert his independence and elected to trust his own judgment.

    ''There were a few disasters,'' he recalls. ''One morning my cousin caught
me just as I was getting off the school bus and told me to go home and change .
.  . for my own good.''

    For a long time he wore jeans because, for him, they were fail-safe. Sales
clerks were often patronizing.

    ''When I requested assistance and told them I was colour deficient suddenly
they started talking louder to me,'' he recalls. ''They talked to me like I was
a child.''

    Storto treated his colour deficiency as a ''little secret'' and recalls
taking his friends' advice to keep it under wraps.

    ''They told me it would ruin my career,'' says Storto. ''Sometimes in stores
I'd complain about the lighting and ask for assistance. It's not worth going
through the whole story.''

    And as long as the fashion industry maintains its fascination with black and
gray, he feels he's designing on a level field.

    De Montigny leans on his wife, whose judgment he trusts. Together they have
defined a range of colours that work for him.

    Katherine Parris of the Association of Image Consultants International in
Toronto advises colour deficient men to find the colours that work best for them
even if it means visiting a trained colourist.

    They work in terms of ''seasons,'' an approach which determines colours that
flatter skin tone and narrow the choice.

    De Montigny relies heavily on his memory when he dresses for work.

    And he makes some decisions fool proof - all of his socks are black and they
have no pattern.

    Most colour deficient men learn colours from knowledge or memory.

    They know lemons are yellow and that eggplants are purple.

    And while he can't tell you by looking, he recalls that the suit he bought
last year is chocolate brown.

    So if he needs a new shirt and tie, he can relay that information to a sales
clerk.

    De Montigny wasn't diagnosed as colour deficient until he was in Grade 1.

    As he recalls, it boiled to the surface in art class.

    De Montigny felt he was as capable a painter as any of the other children.
But despite his efforts the teacher refused to display his completed project.

    ''I thought the picture was great. The leaves were brown, the tree trunk was
green and the water was purple. The teacher thought I was being a smart aleck.
''

    That piece of art led to a series of tests and the results revealed that he
could not distinguish between certain groups of colours.

    He saw browns, greens and reds as the same colour.

    As well, purples, pinks, mauves and grays were a mishmash.

    De Montigny and his parents learned a lot from those tests.

    Most significantly, they learned it's a male thing. And, as a result, his
brothers were diagnosed with the same condition.

    In fact, a whopping 8 per cent of men experience trouble distinguishing
certain colours from others.

    And it's almost impossible to predict how many men experience colour
deficiency in very mild forms.

    By contrast, less than 1 per cent of women are affected.

    Like other people with the same condition, de Montigny does not like the
label colour-blind. Colour deficient, he says, is the preferred alternative.

    And for the most part it's not much of a disability at all, says Dr. Jeff
Hovis, an associate professor in the School of Optometry at the University of
Waterloo and an authority on the subject.

    It would certainly exclude these men from working for the police or fire
departments and they would not be allowed to fly for the major airlines. But for
most men it falls into the category of nuisance.

    ''They'd have trouble picking ripe strawberries in the field and their
choice of clothing can be unique,'' Hovis explains.

    And as de Montigny says, ''if I played golf with an orange golf ball, I'd
never find it.''

    It's just too simple or too harsh to suggest that the world of people with
this condition exists only in shades of black and white. There are too many
nuances involved, too many degrees of impairment, Hovis says.

    For example, some colour deficient men have trouble distinguishing between
degrees of reds and greens. That means a yellowish green, orange, red, yellow
could all look identical. It could also affect their perception of gray, blue-
greens, purples, pinks and violets. But along with this, there are sub- classes
of colour deficiencies, each with their own particular set of problem colours.

    Only three out of 100,000 men are completely colour deficient, Hovis says.

    Colour deficiency is a recessive gene attached to the female chromosome. For
that reason it is predominantly a male condition, carried by women.

    So while de Montigny's brothers were also diagnosed as colour deficient,
only his daughter ''may'' have sons who are colour deficient.

    Because it is linked to heredity, most types of colour vision problems are
present at birth.

    But some people experience colour problems with the normal aging of the
eye's lense. The lenses are clear at birth, but darken with age. For example,
older people may have trouble distinguishing one dark colour from another.

    As well, certain medications and retinal or optic nerve disease may disrupt
normal colour vision.

    And while there are colour corrective lenses available, there is no cure.
According to Hovis, most men who buy the colour filtering glasses discard them
after a few months. And the only hope for a cure is gene therapy.

    But as Hovis concedes, it is not a life-risking problem, so clinical trials
that have been conducted on mice have not been performed on humans.


GRAPHIC: RICHARD LAUTENS/TORONTO STAR
 PLAYS IT SAFE:
 Daniel Storto, a Toronto fashion designer, sticks to basic black in his
wardrobe and in his designs. WHAT COLOUR IS IT?
 Is this sweater held by a model at Nicolas Men's Wear in the Yorkville area
green, blue, purple or gray? Eight per cent of men have trouble distinguishing
between colours. The sweater as photographed is actually a shade of green, like
the one top left.

LOAD-DATE: January 13, 2000


                              544 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                     January 13, 2000, Thursday, Edition 1

SECTION: LIFE

LENGTH: 1173 words

HEADLINE: SHOPPING IN THE GRAY ZONE

BYLINE: David Graham

BODY:




    colours



    LIFE WRITER

    Andre de Montigny has an orange lawn.

    At least that's the way he sees it.

    The 36-year-old fax consultant for Xerox has been getting his colours
confused all his life.

    It's not so much a disability as a lifelong nuisance, he says.

    And as most colour deficient men will tell you, shopping for clothes
presents the biggest challenge.

    Even for men who see colours clearly, the task of connecting the right shirt
to the right tie can be tricky business. But for colour deficient men the burden
of building a complete wardrobe can be daunting.

    Many choose to confine themselves to a familiar zone of colours, ones they
can distinguish - mix and match.

    Toronto fashion designer Daniel Storto sticks to basic black in his own
wardrobe and in the designs he creates.

    ''On the rare occasions when I delve into colour it's a bit of a potluck,''
he says. ''It gets a little tricky when I have to choose thread because the
match has to be right on. I've been faking it for a long time.''

    But he keeps his sense of humour.

    ''The fact is, buying bananas is the real nightmare. I can never tell if
they're ripe or not.''

    De Montigny recalls his childhood wardrobe was labelled by his mother so he
could match his clothes.

    ''My mother ruled until I was in high school,'' he says.

    But by Grade 9 he no longer wanted the telltale tags.

    He wanted to assert his independence and elected to trust his own judgment.

    ''There were a few disasters,'' he recalls. ''One morning my cousin caught
me just as I was getting off the school bus and told me to go home and change .
.  . for my own good.''

    For a long time he wore jeans because, for him, they were fail-safe. Sales
clerks were often patronizing.

    ''When I requested assistance and told them I was colour deficient suddenly
they started talking louder to me,'' he recalls. ''They talked to me like I was
a child.''

    Storto treated his colour deficiency as a ''little secret'' and recalls
taking his friends' advice to keep it under wraps.

    ''They told me it would ruin my career,'' says Storto. ''Sometimes in stores
I'd complain about the lighting and ask for assistance. It's not worth going
through the whole story.''

    And as long as the fashion industry maintains its fascination with black and
gray, he feels he's designing on a level field.

    De Montigny leans on his wife, whose judgment he trusts. Together they have
defined a range of colours that work for him.

    Katherine Parris of the Association of Image Consultants International in
Toronto advises colour deficient men to find the colours that work best for them
even if it means visiting a trained colourist.

    They work in terms of ''seasons,'' an approach which determines colours that
flatter skin tone and narrow the choice.

    De Montigny relies heavily on his memory when he dresses for work.

    And he makes some decisions fool proof - all of his socks are black and they
have no pattern.

    Most colour deficient men learn colours from knowledge or memory.

    They know lemons are yellow and that eggplants are purple.

    And while he can't tell you by looking, he recalls that the suit he bought
last year is chocolate brown.

    So if he needs a new shirt and tie, he can relay that information to a sales
clerk.

    De Montigny wasn't diagnosed as colour deficient until he was in Grade 1.

    As he recalls, it boiled to the surface in art class.

    De Montigny felt he was as capable a painter as any of the other children.
But despite his efforts the teacher refused to display his completed project.

    ''I thought the picture was great. The leaves were brown, the tree trunk was
green and the water was purple. The teacher thought I was being a smart aleck.
''

    That piece of art led to a series of tests and the results revealed that he
could not distinguish between certain groups of colours.

    He saw browns, greens and reds as the same colour.

    As well, purples, pinks, mauves and grays were a mishmash.

    De Montigny and his parents learned a lot from those tests.

    Most significantly, they learned it's a male thing. And, as a result, his
brothers were diagnosed with the same condition.

    In fact, a whopping 8 per cent of men experience trouble distinguishing
certain colours from others.

    And it's almost impossible to predict how many men experience colour
deficiency in very mild forms.

    By contrast, less than 1 per cent of women are affected.

    Like other people with the same condition, de Montigny does not like the
label colour-blind. Colour deficient, he says, is the preferred alternative.

    And for the most part it's not much of a disability at all, says Dr. Jeff
Hovis, an associate professor in the School of Optometry at the University of
Waterloo and an authority on the subject.

    It would certainly exclude these men from working for the police or fire
departments and they would not be allowed to fly for the major airlines. But for
most men it falls into the category of nuisance.

    ''They'd have trouble picking ripe strawberries in the field and their
choice of clothing can be unique,'' Hovis explains.

    And as de Montigny says, ''if I played golf with an orange golf ball, I'd
never find it.''

    It's just too simple or too harsh to suggest that the world of people with
this condition exists only in shades of black and white. There are too many
nuances involved, too many degrees of impairment, Hovis says.

    For example, some colour deficient men have trouble distinguishing between
degrees of reds and greens. That means a yellowish green, orange, red, yellow
could all look identical. It could also affect their perception of gray, blue-
greens, purples, pinks and violets. But along with this, there are sub- classes
of colour deficiencies, each with their own particular set of problem colours.

    Only three out of 100,000 men are completely colour deficient, Hovis says.

    Colour deficiency is a recessive gene attached to the female chromosome. For
that reason it is predominantly a male condition, carried by women.

    So while de Montigny's brothers were also diagnosed as colour deficient,
only his daughter ''may'' have sons who are colour deficient.

    Because it is linked to heredity, most types of colour vision problems are
present at birth.

    But some people experience colour problems with the normal aging of the
eye's lense. The lenses are clear at birth, but darken with age. For example,
older people may have trouble distinguishing one dark colour from another.

    As well, certain medications and retinal or optic nerve disease may disrupt
normal colour vision.

    And while there are colour corrective lenses available, there is no cure.
According to Hovis, most men who buy the colour filtering glasses discard them
after a few months. And the only hope for a cure is gene therapy.

    But as Hovis concedes, it is not a life-risking problem, so clinical trials
that have been conducted on mice have not been performed on humans.


GRAPHIC: RICHARD LAUTENS/TORONTO STAR
 PLAYS IT SAFE:
 Daniel Storto, a Toronto fashion designer, sticks to basic black in his
wardrobe and in his designs. WHAT COLOUR IS IT?
 Is this sweater held by a model at Nicolas Men's Wear in the Yorkville area
green, blue, purple or gray? Eight per cent of men have trouble distinguishing
between colours. The sweater as photographed is actually a shade of green, like
the one top left.

LOAD-DATE: January 13, 2000


                              545 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Sun Media Corporation
                      London Free Press (Ontario, Canada)

                    January 1, 2000, Saturday, Final EDITION

SECTION: LONDON AT 2000 - DISASTERS, WOMEN & FAMILY, HEALTH, Pg. B11

LENGTH: 919 words

HEADLINE: MEDICAL MILESTONES OF THE 20TH CENTURY

BYLINE: MARY-JANE EGAN, FREE PRESS HEALTH REPORTER

BODY:


   - 1884 London doctors perform the first hysterectomy in Ontario, outside
Toronto.

   - 1900-1907 Mary Mallon, an immigrant Irish cook, infects 22 people in seven
years with typhoid fever, coining the term Typhoid Mary. She is eventually
quarantined for three years and released after promising never to cook again.

   - 1901 First x-ray.

   - 1903 Electrocardiograph invented.

   - 1904 Alexis Carrel becomes first person in an American lab to win Nobel
Prize for developing the technique of surgically connecting blood vessels.

   - 1905 German Robert Koch wins Nobel Prize for his discovery of tubercle
bacillus that causes tuberculosis.

   - 1909 First magic bullet Salvarsan 606 cures syphilis.

   - 1918-19 Spanish flu epidemic kills 20 million people worldwide.

   - 1921 Dr. Frederick Banting of London conceives insulin, later developing it
in Toronto with Dr. Charles Best.

   - 1925-52 Canada's worst period for tuberculosis during which 164,777 perish.

   - 1927 London's St. Joseph's Hospital, under leadership of Dr. F.W. Luney,
pioneers human blood transfusions.

   - 1929 Penicillin discovered by Alexander Fleming in England. Ten years
later, Oxford scientists purify the key substance and by D-day in 1944, there
was plenty of penicillin to treat Allied soldiers.

   - 1930 Karl Landsteiner wins Nobel Prize for discovery of blood groups.

   - 1934 London doctors Evan and Wilfrid Shute publish their findings on the
efficacy of Vitamin E on angina and other cardiovascular disorders. They are
ignored in medical circles until the 1990s.

   - 1937 Dr. Ed Bartram of London, the first cardiologist in Southwestern
Ontario, purchases the region's first electrocardiograph machine.

   - 1948 Dr. Murray Barr of London discovers the sex chromatin, launching
genetic research. London's Victoria Hospital is the first hospital in Canada
with an artificial kidney machine. All stages in life cycle of malaria- causing
mosquito identified. Discovery made of Antabuse, a drug that makes alcoholics
sick if they drink alcohol.

   - 1949 Lithium, the first truly effective drug to control manic depression,
developed, followed in the 1950s by chlorpromazine and other drugs to treat
schizophrenia.

   - 1950 Jonas Salk of the University of Pittsburgh develops a vaccine for
polio.

   - 1951 London is first to use Cobalt 60 as a radiation treatment for cancer
patients -- one of the first peaceful uses of atomic energy. Neurosurgery is
performed at London's Victoria Hospital.

   - 1952 Streptomycin, antibiotic for tuberculosis, discovered.

   - 1953 James Watson and Francis Crick discover the rope-ladder structure of
deoxyribonucleic acid. Each rung of the ladder is a unit of genetic code.
Together, they contain all the construction plans of life. Dr. Bob Noble of
London discovers Vincaleukoblastine while studying a herb from the periwinkle
plant as a possible diabetes treatment. The extract has no impact on diabetes
but proves effective in treating malignant tumours -- especially Hodgkin's
disease. It remains successful in battling some childhood cancers.

   - 1954 J. Hartwell Harrison and Joseph Murray of Boston perform the first
successful kidney transplant.

   - 1955 Albert Sabin develops the more effective oral vaccine for polio.

   - 1956 Cardiac catheterization developed.

   - 1957-58 Asian flu kills 70,000 in U.S.

   - Late 1950s Birth control pill developed. It's mass marketed in the '60s.

   - 1960 s Dr. Charles Drake of London revolutionizes neurosurgery by
developing a technique for previously fatal brain aneurysms, earning University
Hospital an international reputation in neurosurgery.

   - 1961 Anti-nausea drug thalidomide banned after causing severe birth defects
from 1956 to 1961.

   - 1962 Severed human limb is re-connected.

   - 1963 Toronto's Hospital for Sick Children pioneers a life-saving technique
that spares "blue babies" -- babies whose arteries in the heart are reversed.

   - 1967 Dr. Christian Barnard performs first human heart transplant in South
Africa.

   - 1968-69 Hong Kong flu kills 34,000 in U.S.

   - 1972 University Hospital does first kidney transplant.

   - 1977 Last naturally occurring outbreak of smallpox in Somalia.

   - 1978 Test tube baby Louise Brown born healthy.

   - 1979 CAT scans developed.

   Late 1970s London biochemist Dr. Fred Possmayer, in collaboration with a
Toronto scientist, develops bovine surfactant to treat neonatal respiratory
distress syndrome. It prevents premature babies' lungs from collapsing.

   - 1980 London launches first Canadian trial of cyclosporin, transplant
anti-rejection drug.

   - 1981 AIDS identified.

   - 1988 London doctors perform first successful liver-small bowel transplant.

   - 1989 Cystic fibrosis gene discovered.

   - 1990 Gene therapy becomes a reality when a four-year-old girl in Bethesda,
Md., with a severe immune-system deficiency receives a 30-minute infusion of
white blood cells engineered to contain copies of the gene she lacks.

   - 1994 London performs the world's first three-dimensional ultra-sound-
guided cryosurgery prostate procedure, new hope for cancer patients where
radiation has failed.

   - 1995 University of Toronto scientists discover the gene responsible for the
most aggressive form of Alzheimer's disease.

   - 1997 Adult sheep called Dolly cloned.

   - 1999 London performs world's first successful closed-chest,
robotic-assisted, beating-heart bypass. F A Palmerston girl helps scientists
make history by decoding chromosome 22 -- the first human chromosome ever to be
decoded.

GRAPHIC: 3 photos 1. photo by Photo Courtesy Banting House, London Dr. Frederick
Banting examines a dog in this 1923 photo. Banting won a Nobel Prize for the
discovery and development of insulin.  2. photo by Free Press File Photo An iron
lung, used to treat polio, sits at the bedside of a patient on the polio ward at
Victoria Hospital in 1950.  3. photo by Free Press File Photo The London Health
Sciences Centre recently demonstrated leading-edge robotic heart surgery.

LOAD-DATE: January 3, 2000
