
                               8 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2010 Sun Media Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved
                             Edmonton Sun (Alberta)

                           September 17, 2010 Friday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 536 words

HEADLINE: MS discovery a fluke;
U of A lab's finding could lead to new treatments for the devastating disease

BYLINE: ANDREW HANON

BODY:

   An accidental discovery in a University of Alberta lab could lead to new
treatments for multiple sclerosis.

   "That," said Marek Michalak, one of the two biochemists who made the
discovery that led to the breakthrough, "is the beauty of open-minded,
curiosity- driven research."

   Michalak and biochemist Allison Kraus were doing genetic research unrelated
to MS five years ago, when they stumbled upon a link between a specific gene in
nerve cells and myelin, the insulation coating the cells.

   They were studying how certain genes function, and found that when they
removed a certain protein, they accidentally created neurological diseases.

   Whenever the protein, known as calnexin, was removed, they found the myelin
coating the cells became weaker and loose, just like MS.

   Michalak compared it to insulation around an electrical wire -- if the wire
isn't properly protected, the electricity leaks out, reducing the cell's ability
to transmit.

   The lab models -- rats -- had difficulty moving, displaying symptoms similar
to MS and other neurological diseases.

   "Myelin diseases are so diverse and so tricky to figure out," he said.
"Nobody understands why these diseases happen which cause people to
progressively lose their motor functions. We have discovered a new player in
myelin diseases that was never considered before. It's been an interesting and
unexpected discovery."

   When they realized what they had found, a team of researchers was assembled
around the world to study it further. Their findings were recently published in
the Journal of Biological Chemistry.

   Neil Pierce, president of the local MS society chapter, which helped fund the
study, called it "a big day for Albertans. My hope is that another new treatment
is in the offing. For someone with MS, this could have a major impact on their
life."

   Canada has some of the highest rates of MS in the world, and Pierce called
Alberta "the MS capital of Canada, along with Saskatchewan."

   There are roughly 11,000 MS sufferers in the province.

   For Julie Kelndorfer, who was diagnosed with MS six years ago, the potential
of this discovery is immense.

   The 35-year-old mom had an aunt with MS.

   "If they're able to look at genetic markers, maybe I'll be able to get my son
tested to see if he has them. I think that's really exciting."

   It also opens the door for potential gene therapies to treat the disease.

   "Will it affect me? Who knows? But this will certainly open the path to
further investigation."

   Meanwhile, the MS Society of Canada announced Tuesday that it has set aside
$1 million to help fund clinical trials for the controversial liberation
treatment, which involves opening blocked blood vessels in the neck.

   Pierce said it's now up to the provinces and feds to pony up the rest of the
money, estimated at $10 to $12 million.

   People who have undergone the treatment say it works wonders, but most
governments have said it hasn't been studied enough to know if it's safe or
effective. The Saskatchewan and PEI governments have said they're willing to
help fund a national trial, but other provinces are awaiting the results of
several preliminary studies before saying anything one way or the other.

   andrew.hanon@sunmedia.ca Follow me on Twitter:

   twitter.com/andrewhanon

GRAPHIC: Perry Mah/Edmonton Sun The U of A's Marek Michalak speaks to the media
at the university's medical sciences building Thursday about researchers'
discovery of a gene that has implications for multiple sclerosis.

LOAD-DATE: September 17, 2010


                              13 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2010 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved
                    The Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                            April 22, 2010 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 929  words

HEADLINE: Blindness won't dim artist's vision

BYLINE: Brent Lawson, The Hamilton Spectator

BODY:

   Yvonne Felix beams with enthusiasm, like a classical painting that appears to
have its own inner source of light.

   She isn't letting the fact she is legally blind stop her from looking to the
future. Or dampen her determination to pursue a career in art.

   "No matter who says 'no' to you, there's always a 'yes' out there," says the
Hamilton resident.

   Felix, 29, has just graduated from the highly regarded Dundas Valley School
of Art -- the first legally blind person to achieve that distinction.

   Soon, she will be teaching art to sighted students -- believed to be another
first. (Artists who have lost their sight due to accident or injury have also
taught.)

   When Felix was a child, she saw the colours of the rainbow. Then her vision
began to diminish. Now, she paints what she remembers and the vivid colours she
still sees in her dreams.

   The term "legally blind" doesn't mean her visual impairment is just a
technicality. Far from it. Felix has about 2 per cent peripheral vision and a
central blind spot. It's like having to look at the world past a white patch no
one else can see.

   The impairments stem from Stargardt's disease, a kind of juvenile macular
degeneration that developed when she was seven.

   Felix has a similar condition to visually impaired cross-country skier Brian
McKeever, who earned a spot on Canada's Olympic team but wasn't chosen to
actually compete at the Vancouver Games.

   So graduating is no small achievement.

   The event also marks a milestone in a lengthy journey from Felix's art class
at a northern Ontario high school. There, her projects were often singled out as
a lesson for other students of what "not" to do.

   Today, Felix feels she is being rewarded for her perseverance.

   "This is great and I feel I want to share that (sentiment) with people."

   "No matter what ... if you want to do something, you can," Felix says.
"There's nothing that can stop you as long as you are determined and you know
that it's going to be hard work."

   Felix does not want to be viewed as a kind of novelty item. Rather, she wants
to give back to the community that has provided opportunities and helped nurture
her dreams.

   She earned a grant to attend art school. She's also been working at her
educational assistant's diploma at the same time, so she could eventually work
at a school. Plus, she expects to be teaching some classes at Dundas Valley
School of Art and for a local service club.

   "She's a great spirit. She's artistic, she's concerned, she's amazing," says
Arthur Greenblatt, executive director at the art school.

   Is the whole notion of a blind person in an art course unusual?

   "It's unique. In over 40 years of working with students, she's the second
student I've ever worked with in any capacity who was blind."

   But that person didn't see art as a calling, the way Felix does.

   Greenblatt recalls a workshop Felix put together for teachers from the W.
Ross Macdonald School for the Blind in Brantford.

   "It was amazing. She has an ability to understand what none of us can -- what
it's like to be in those two worlds simultaneously. Because, in some ways, she
functions like a sighted person, and in most ways she doesn't.

   "And she knows what those people can go through."

   Felix said that first workshop was exciting but nerve-racking.

   "Everyone knew that I had a visual impairment, and they work with people who
have visual impairments. So I was comfortable. They didn't care if I looked them
in the eye. I knew there were things about me that they already understood. But
at the same time ... I need to know what I am doing.

   "These are professionals, these are teachers who are going to go out and use
the information I have to make their students' experience with art more
beneficial. It was happy scary.

   "What I've come to learn is it's not even about how things look. It's a
completely different mindset.

   "Things like smell are so important. And how work is interpreted. You can't
get a photograph and put astroturf on it with white fluff, and say, 'Here's
where the grass is and here are the clouds.'

   "Because grass -- to me or someone else who can't see -- is like this long,
skinny thing that is moist or cold. It has a completely different meaning, not
just a visual one. So trying to tie in the emotional and visceral responses
people have to visual responses is like a whole science." A different
vocabulary.

   "That's one of my main focuses -- trying to develop a language that will
allow me to hover between both worlds almost, and connect them together."

   At DVSA, she will run workshops for teachers in school boards and for people
who are visually impaired. She will teach them how to draw, paint and sculpt,
but on a level that makes sense to them.

   Felix has a son (Noah) and the focus of her own work now is based on working
with children.

   "I've always had an interest in the creative process of making things, so
play is a huge thing," she says. Her shows in the past four years have revolved
around developing toys and play spaces for children.

   And, on another front, Felix is excited research is under way to tackle the
disease that robbed her of much of her vision. The Foundation Fighting Blindness
is partnering with the Canadian Institutes of Health Research in a $3-million,
five-year grant that will fund a research project to develop innovative gene
therapies for a number of degenerative retinal diseases.

   But, for now, Felix is thrilled with her own progress.

   "I had a goal four years ago. Then, the goal was still kind of a dream. Now,
it's like this is reality. I am doing this."

   blawson@thespec.com

   905-526-2463

   A couple of pieces of Yvonne Felix's artwork.

GRAPHIC: Photo: Gary Yokoyama, the Hamilton Spectator , Yvonne Felix is the
first legally blind graduate of Dundas Valley School of Art. Soon, she will be
teaching art to sighted students.; Photo: Gary Yokoyama, the Hamilton Spectator
, Yvonne Felix: 'What I've come to learn is it's not even about how things look.
It's a completely different mindset.'; Photo: A piece of Yvonne Felix's
artwork.; Photo: Another piece of Yvonne Felix's artwork.

LOAD-DATE: April 22, 2010


                              15 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2010 Sun Media Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved
                             Edmonton Sun (Alberta)

                           February 11, 2010 Thursday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Sunflashes; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 506 words

HEADLINE: Sunflashes Column

BYLINE: BY QMI AGENCY

BODY:

   Hockey coach charged with molesting boy

   ST. JOHN'S, N.L.- Prominent Newfoundland and Labrador hockey coach Rick
Babstock, 57, was arrested Tuesday and charged with sexually assaulting a boy
nearly 40 years ago.

   Babstock -- who has coached thousands of kids in St. John's, N.L. -- faces
charges of indecent assault and gross indecency.

   The alleged incidents are said to have occurred between August and September
1971, in Placentia, N.L., a small town of about 4,000.

   Babstock, who is now retired, was inducted into the Hockey Newfoundland and
Labrador Hall of Fame in 2002.

   During his almost four-decade career, he coached current and past NHL
players, including Ryan Clowe, Harold Druken and Ted Purcell.

   Sicko-mocking bear beside Olympic mascots

   A popular Internet character dubbed "Pedobear" has found its way alongside
2010 Winter Olympic mascots in Google Images searches and in a Polish newspaper.

   Pedobear, a cartoon bear used to mock pedophiles on the Internet, appears in
an image next to the official mascots Quatchi, Mukmuk, and Sumi in the Polish
newspaper Gazeta Olsztynska.

   The paper mistakenly identifies Pedobear as one of the mascots.

   The Spanish website, DeportesSpain.com, also briefly identified the bear as
an official mascot, though the image has since been removed.

   Avrobode, a Dutch television directory, placed the joke image in their print
edition.

   Baby toys a safety hazard, Sears warns

   Wind chime baby toys made by Tiny Love Inc. and sold through Sears pose a
safety hazard to children, Sears Canada said in a release.

   The wind chimes have been sold in stores, online and through the catalogue
since February 2002.

   Some of the toys were sold individually; others were sold as part of a gift
set or a play centre.

   The affected model numbers are MFG No. 493, baby wind chime; MFG. No. 539,
Tiny Love gift set; and MFG 811, Gymini Kick and Play (duck only).

   Sears is advising those who purchased the wind chimes to stop using them
immediately and call Tiny Love's customer service department at 1-888-791-8166
for a replacement or for more information.

   Gene mutation discovery may help diabetics

   The discovery of a rare gene mutation that can cause neonatal diabetes may
lead to more breakthroughs for those living with the disease, a new study says.

   Researchers at McGill University looked at a previously unstudied gene known
as RFX6 and mutations that can sometimes occur.

   Researchers at the University of California at San Francisco used that
information and showed that by altering the same gene in mice, it caused
neonatal diabetes.

   "This discovery brings us closer to one day finding a cure for diabetes,"

   Constantin Polychronakos of McGill's Endocrine Genetics Laboratory said in a
release, "Now that we know the RFX6 gene is crucial in the process of insulin
production, the door is open to finding a cure through gene therapy or
therapeutics that will create new islets out of cells from the rest of the
pancreas."

   The Juvenile Diabetes Foundation funded the study, which will appear in an
upcoming edition of the journal Nature.

LOAD-DATE: February 11, 2010


                              18 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2010 Sun Media Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved
                             Edmonton Sun (Alberta)

                           January 27, 2010 Wednesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: EDITORIAL/OPINION; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 592 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy

BYLINE: BY ROY CLANCY

BODY:

   We're not sure if our health-care system is undergoing an abrupt change of
course, or merely a slight correction.

   New Health Minister Gene Zwozdesky has made big waves since he took over.

   Although his decisive action in reversing a plan to close almost 450 hospital
beds should have a positive impact, Albertans could be forgiven for feeling a
little seasick.

   We're still reeling from a series of confusing messages about the performance
of the $11-billion system two years after Alberta's health-care regions were
dismantled and replaced by one superboard.

   "We're going to arrive at the best-performing public health system in Canada
right here in Alberta," Zwozdesky says. "That's what we're pledged to do."

   But haven't we've heard this before? Oh yeah, that's what former minister Ron
Liepert promised to do.

   "The aim of the new Alberta Health Services Board is to increase access to
health services and ensure one seamless provincial health-care system." said
Liepert of his restructuring in May 2008.

   Nearly two years later, we await the details. What we have seen since then is
millions of dollars in golden parachutes to fired health region CEOs and another
$1.2 million severance to the temporary CEO who filled in while the superboard
ran an annual deficit six times greater than the shortfall racked up by all the
health regions combined.

   New CEO Stephen Duckett took over less than a year ago.

   Facing a post-recession economy, he pledged patient care would remain top
priority while cost efficiencies were found in "non-clinical" areas such as
administration and duplication of services.

   A decision under former minister Ron Liepert to close almost 300 acute-care
beds in Calgary and Edmonton and 150 psychiatric beds seemed to contradict that
vow.

   Reports of organizational paralysis in the system appeared to be borne out by
the superboard's chaotic H1N1 vaccine rollout.

   The critics called for the tough-talking Liepert's head and Premier Ed
Stelmach, desperate to curry favour with Albertans, gave it to them on a
platter. Emboldened groups like the Friends of Medicare are now going after
Duckett.

   Terminating yet another CEO who did nothing more than operate within the
mandate handed him by his political masters would accomplish little besides
satisfying the bloodlust of the ceaseless complainers who fail to offer
compelling alternatives.

   Besides, there are reasons for optimism. Duckett's "efficiencies" will net up
to $700 million in savings next year.

   Zwozdesky, no stranger to the health file, appears to realize earning the
confidence of Albertans is necessary, to achieve meaningful change.

   A report this week by an advisory committee on health acknowledges the
lingering climate of mistrust and wants new laws enshrining patient rights and
responsibilities.

   On the negative side, a superboard announcement it will devise a way to
measure the performance of the health system was greeted with amazement such a
mechanism isn't already in place.

   It also appeared suspiciously timed to head off the new Health Quality
Council report that says wait times are worsening.

   Albertans have grown cynical about a system that devours more dollars per
capita than any other province and delivers only mediocre results. It's
encouraging the new minister appears prepared to back up his promises with bold
action.

   Catchphrases and bureaucratic gobbledegook arouse nothing more than cynicism
these days.

   Zwozdesky's appointment may usher in a new approach to the health-care
conundrum. But Albertans will have to see the results to believe it.

   ROY.CLANCY@SUNMEDIA.CA

LOAD-DATE: January 27, 2010


                              19 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2010 Sun Media Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Toronto Sun

                            January 11, 2010 Monday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 1380 words

HEADLINE: Are we on the brink of a stem-cell breakthrough?;
Researchers say China may be the country to make significant discoveries in
regenerative therapies

BYLINE: BY SHARON LEM, SUN MEDIA

BODY:

   Erica and Shannon Deering have dared to dream of one day walking, getting
married and frolicking on a beach with their children.

   The Deering sisters -- Erica, 21, and Shannon, 24, of Port Perry -- were left
paralyzed after a devastating 2004 car accident.

   Terrified and overwhelmed with worry, the girls' father, Tony Deering, began
researching everything he could to find a cure. It led the family to find hope
in an experimental stem-cell therapy in southern China, where patients claim
they have been miraculously cured from spinal cord injuries.

   For 5 1/2 weeks, the sisters underwent stem-cell transfusions in December
2006 at Shenzhen Nanshan People's Hospital. Millions of umbilical stem cells
were injected into the fluid of the lower spine, in concert with herbal
intravenous treatments and acupuncture.

   At first, the sisters said they felt warmth in their legs due to an increase
in circulation in their limbs and physical changes in their postures. They were
able to sit up straighter and breathing became less laborious during
physiotherapy.

   But, the sisters did not receive the miracle they had wished for. They are
still not able to move their feet or grip their fingers into a fist.

   "In terms of regaining movement -- nothing like that happened. We didn't
really have any major improvements, but it did boost our immune systems and we
weren't sick for two years straight -- not even with a cold," said Erica, who is
learning to transfer herself from a bed to her wheelchair in rehab.

   "I'm glad I did it because if we hadn't done it, we'd still be wondering what
might have happened," Erica said.

   Shannon said the experience in China was "worth a shot."

   "It was all so brand new back then. It was something we had to do and I'm
glad we did because it was an amazing experience," said Shannon, who now lives
with her boyfriend in Port Perry.

   "I would tell people thinking of going over to China to wait and give
scientists more time to come up with something more concrete with evidence that
it works," Shannon said.

   The Deering sisters are among thousands of patients who have made the
pilgrimage to China for the controversial regenerative stem-cell treatments. The
weekly stem-cell injections cost the sisters $40,000. Another $108,000 was spent
on flights, hotels and two personal caregivers who were needed 24/7 to attend
the girls' therapy and needs.

   Regnerative medicine using stem-cell research, tissue engineering and gene
therapy is cutting-edge research. It focuses on the repair, replacement and
regeneration of cells, tissues or organs to restore damaged function resulting
from diseases and ailments.

   In Canada, only a handful of safe and well-established regenerative stem-cell
therapies are available for blood disorders such as leukemia with bone marrow
transplants, immune disorders, and tissue grafting. Other stem-cell therapies
are still being studied and require more testing to ensure their safety and
long-term benefits before they can be tried on humans.

   Meanwhile, Toronto researchers published a study Friday in the Regenerative
Medicine journal, which shows China has become one of the top five players in
the world in regenerative medicine research.

   The study found the Chinese government poured billions into stem-cell
research. China's gross domestic expenditure on research and development in
science and technology grew from $4.8 billion in 1996 to a whopping $42.5
billion today. Much of the R&D funding goes to stem-cell research and tissue
engineering and gene therapy.

   "China has been a rising star in the regenerative medicine field. China's
researchers were quick to get on stem cells from the start," said study author
Dr. Dominique McMahon, of the McLaughlin-Rotman Centre for Global Health at the
University Health Network and the University of Toronto.

   China can trace its roots in stem-cell research back to 1963 when Dizhou Tong
cloned an Asian carp, producing the world's first cloned fish.

   In recent years, McMahon said China provided huge incentives to recruit
Chinese nationals from world- renowned centres in the U.S. and the U.K. to
return to China to conduct stem-cell research. And now there are signs of the
payoff from the investments.

   In terms of the number of articles on stem cells in medical and scientific
journals, the study found China was the fifth largest contributor in 2008, while
Canada was ranked eighth after the U.S., Germany, Japan, U.K., China, Italy and
France.

   The number of scientific publications written by China's researchers jumped
from 37 in peer-reviewed journals in the year 2000 to 1,116 in 2008. Canada
published 647 journal papers on stem cells in 2008.

   While the study found that China is becoming a scientific powerhouse in
stem-cell research, it has, however, been tainted by more than 200 controversial
for-profit stem-cell treatment hospital clinics, which claim they have developed
treatments for Lou Gehrig's disease, traumatic brain and spinal cord injury,
diabetes, Parkinson's, multiple sclerosis, autism, cerebral palsy, stroke, optic
nerve hypoplasia and many others.

   FOREIGN PATIENTS

   McMahon said these controversial stem-cell hospital clinics scattered across
China treat Chinese patients, but they also target large numbers of foreign
patients -- such as the Deering sisters.

   A skeptical international research community condemns the practice of these
Chinese clinics, which administer unproven stem-cell therapies to vulnerable
patients.

   McMahon and her colleagues flew to China for the study and visited some of
these questionable clinics.

   "We found for the most part, China has not been well-recognized in terms of
contribution to research. We think international criticism has been holding them
back from moving forward ... because of the confusion between the legitimate
research being done there with stem-cell clinics providing treatments, which
have no clinical evidence," McMahon said, adding that China is in the process of
implementing new rules to govern such treatments.

   "The field is exciting and it is ripe for exploitation of vulnerable
individuals and for some indications, this is exactly what's happening in China,
the Dominican Republic and India. But China seems to be one of the major
players," said Dr. Tim Caulfield, Canada's research chairman in health law and
policy.

   "Some of the most controversial therapies are being offered and there's
little evidence to support their usefulness. Treatments from cancer to spinal
cord injuries to MS, to neurological disorders are being used with stem-cell
therapies but there isn't any evidence to support the use," Caulfield said.

   "It is a paradox. We don't want to paint the whole country with the same
punishment. China is leading-edge in top journals, yet at the same time they
have very questionable practices at these stem-cell clinics, which are often not
proven therapies," he said.

   "If the stem-cell clinic centres really work, they should be able to prove
the data on cases they've cured -- why hold back?" Caulfield said.

   "These stem-cell clinics are taking advantage of desperate people -- that's
their modus operandi. This should serve as a red flag because it's too good to
be true," said Dr. Michael Rudnicki, scientific director of the Canadian
Stem-cell Network.

   China has some catching up to do in terms of the regulation of clinical
trials and issuing licences to practise experimental therapies at these
for-profit stem-cell clinics, he said.

   MORE ENFORCEMENT

   "While their regulatory regime is up-to-date for international standards from
the research end, there still needs to be more enforcement, oversight and
regulatory guidelines at for-profit centres, which are clearly not delivering
appropriate treatments," Rudnicki said.

   In Canada, no such practice would be deemed acceptable. Before even
considering conducting clinical trials, scientists must meet rigourous
requirements set down by Health Canada.

   Erica Deering is waiting for the day when regenerative stem cells can cure
her.

   "I'm trying to get on the list to be one of the guinea pigs in the U.S. for
clinical trials in California using embryonic stem cells from a fetus for spinal
cord injuries," said Erica, who is studying broadcast journalism in the U.S.

   "I believe stem cells are going to be successful, it just needs more time."

   SHARON.LEM@SUNMEDIA.CA

GRAPHIC: 1. photo by Jack Boland, Sun Media Erica, 21, and Shannon Deering, 24,
pose in their Port Perry home with dogs Kali and Bubba. The sisters went to
China for stem cell injections in December 2006 hoping to regain movement in
their bodies. The treatments did not work. 2. graphic

LOAD-DATE: January 11, 2010


                              20 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2010 Sun Media Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Toronto Sun

                            January 11, 2010 Monday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 298 words

HEADLINE: Funds needed to stay on top

BYLINE: BY SHARON LEM

BODY:

   Canada is a leader in regenerative medicine research but Prime Minister
Stephen Harper's government needs to invest more funding to stay at the top,
experts say.

   Dr. Michael Rudnicki, scientific director of Canada's Stem-Cell Network, says
there are a number of studies that look at how government investment in research
comes back to develop the economy by 10 times the initial investment.

   "Investing in research is part of what first-world countries do and if you
don't, you will be rapidly left behind by the world. Research is an important
stimulator of economic growth. It cannot be left aside," Rudnicki said, adding
Harper's Tory government has flat-lined funding to research institutes, such as
the Canadian Institute of Health and the Engineering Science Research Council.

   "For example, in the IT area, funding of computer scientists led to the
creation of the BlackBerry.

   New stem-cell treatments could lead to new drugs and innovative developments
which could prevent certain chronic conditions. This would not only improve the
health of Canadians but save the health-care system money," Rudnicki said.

   Funding invested into research today won't see dividends until perhaps 10 to
15 years down the road when a new patent, drug or therapy is created, he said.

   Dr. Dominique McMahon, of the McLaughlin-Rotman Centre for Global Health at
the University Health Network and U of T, concurs.

   "We found investment in China was a key part of why their productivity was so
good in the field and this holds true for Canada -- to maintain competitiveness,
it's important to maintain government support in funding," she said.

   "We saw in China the key reason for investing in stem-cell research was to
make sure their population has access to new therapies and decrease chronic
diseases," McMahon said.

GRAPHIC: 1. photo of MICHAEL RUDNICKI Several studies 2. photo by Michael Peake,
Toronto Sun Dr. Dominique McMahon has published a study on stem-cell research in
China and found the country is becoming a major world player in regenerative
medicine -- stem cell research, tissue engineering and gene therapy.

LOAD-DATE: January 11, 2010


                              22 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2009 Sun Media Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved
                             Edmonton Sun (Alberta)

                           November 14, 2009 Saturday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 320 words

HEADLINE: National H1N1 vaccine supply gets shot in the arm

BYLINE: BY CHRISTINA SPENCER

BODY:

   Buffeted by criticism about shortages of H1N1 vaccine -- including in the
nation's capital -- federal health officials have widened access to the H1N1
shot, by approving a Canadian-made product with no booster additive and
expanding the list of demographic groups who can receive it.

   Dr. David Butler-Jones, Canada's chief public health officer, said yesterday
he's recommending the unadjuvanted vaccine manufactured by GlaxoSmithKline in
Ste-Foy, Que., be made available for healthy people aged 10 to 64. His previous
guideline called for that group to receive adjuvanted vaccine, i.e. shots with a
booster.

   The unadjuvanted GSK product had already been sent to provincial warehouses
in anticipation of federal approval, which came Thursday, according to Dr. Elwyn
Griffiths, director general of the biologics and genetic therapies directorate
at Health Canada.

   In total, Health Canada and the Public Health Agency of Canada had ordered
1.8 million doses of the unadjuvanted vaccine from GSK. It was bound primarily
for pregnant women.

   Since there are only 300,000 to 350,000 pregnancies a year in Canada,
unadjuvanted shots can now be made available to a wider range of people with
healthy immune systems. Butler-Jones recommends those with compromised immune
responses take the adjuvanted version.

   GOOD NEWS

   The seeming glut of unadjuvanted vaccine came with other good news:
Butler-Jones said the unadjuvanted vaccine confers immunity in 94% of those who
receive it, an effectiveness much higher than seasonal flu vaccines, which
normally give 60% to 80% protection. Adjuvanted vaccine has shown results in the
98% range.

   "This is actually a very pleasant finding and beneficial in terms of the
protection it offers," he said.

   GSK has distributed 8.5 million doses of vaccine to date, and a further 1.9
million doses are expected to be in the field next week. About 20% of the
Canadian population has been immunized to date.

LOAD-DATE: November 14, 2009


                              24 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2009 Sun Media Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Toronto Sun

                           November 14, 2009 Saturday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 320 words

HEADLINE: National H1N1 vaccine supply gets shot in the arm

BYLINE: BY CHRISTINA SPENCER

BODY:

   Buffeted by criticism about shortages of H1N1 vaccine -- including in the
nation's capital -- federal health officials have widened access to the H1N1
shot, by approving a Canadian-made product with no booster additive and
expanding the list of demographic groups who can receive it.

   Dr. David Butler-Jones, Canada's chief public health officer, said yesterday
he's recommending the unadjuvanted vaccine manufactured by GlaxoSmithKline in
Ste-Foy, Que., be made available for healthy people aged 10 to 64. His previous
guideline called for that group to receive adjuvanted vaccine, i.e. shots with a
booster.

   The unadjuvanted GSK product had already been sent to provincial warehouses
in anticipation of federal approval, which came Thursday, according to Dr. Elwyn
Griffiths, director general of the biologics and genetic therapies directorate
at Health Canada.

   In total, Health Canada and the Public Health Agency of Canada had ordered
1.8 million doses of the unadjuvanted vaccine from GSK. It was bound primarily
for pregnant women.

   Since there are only 300,000 to 350,000 pregnancies a year in Canada,
unadjuvanted shots can now be made available to a wider range of people with
healthy immune systems. Butler-Jones recommends those with compromised immune
responses take the adjuvanted version.

   GOOD NEWS

   The seeming glut of unadjuvanted vaccine came with other good news:
Butler-Jones said the unadjuvanted vaccine confers immunity in 94% of those who
receive it, an effectiveness much higher than seasonal flu vaccines, which
normally give 60% to 80% protection. Adjuvanted vaccine has shown results in the
98% range.

   "This is actually a very pleasant finding and beneficial in terms of the
protection it offers," he said.

   GSK has distributed 8.5 million doses of vaccine to date, and a further 1.9
million doses are expected to be in the field next week. About 20% of the
Canadian population has been immunized to date.

LOAD-DATE: November 14, 2009


                              26 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2009 Sun Media Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Toronto Sun

                           October 29, 2009 Thursday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 341 words

HEADLINE: New hope for lung transplants;
T.O. scientists repair damaged donated organs

BYLINE: BY SHARON LEM, SUN MEDIA

BODY:

   A Toronto doctor has found a way to regenerate damaged lungs donated for
transplant, opening the door to one day triple the number of the operations in
Canada and worldwide.

   Normally, only 15% of lungs from deceased donors are usable because 85% are
damaged during brain death and intensive-care-related complications.

   About 20% of people waiting for a lung transplant die each year in Toronto.

   Scientists at the University Health Network, after more than 10 years of
research, have been able to use gene therapy to repair injured donor lungs and
make them potentially suitable to save a life.

   The lungs are repaired outside the body in a special perfusion unit that
pumps oxygen, nutrients and other substances into the organs.

   "It's very exciting," said Dr. Shaf Keshavjee, of the University Health
Network. "What we've done is show we can repair organs outside of the body,
where we can take a damaged lung which would normally be discarded ... and make
it function better after transplant."

   The study found that lungs that received the interleukin-10 gene had improved
blood flow and were better able to take in fresh oxygen and get rid of carbon
dioxide.

   The gene works by decreasing the inflammatory potential of cells injured
before and during the transplant. The gene also has the capability to turn down
the recipient's immune system so that it will be more accepting of the
transplanted organ.

   The effect of the Il-10 gene lasts up to 30 days in the lung.

   Inflammation and organ rejection are the two main complications after
transplant surgery.

   The treatment helps transplanted lungs function better from the start and
leads to more predictable, safer outcomes, shorter periods of mechanical
ventilation and less time in intensive-care units.

   BLOOD FLOW

   "We can improve the number of lungs we transplant and improve the function
and reliability of the damaged lungs and outcome of transplant patients,"
Keshavjee said.

   Clinical human trials will begin in the next two to three years.

   The study is published in the journal Science.

   SHARON.LEM@SUNMEDIA.CA

GRAPHIC: photo Toronto General Hospital's Dr. Marcelo Cypel and Dr. Shaf
Keshavjee, of the University Health Network, deliver the IL-10 gene into donor
lungs, inside the dome, via a bronchoscope.

LOAD-DATE: October 29, 2009


                              32 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2009 Sun Media Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved
                             Edmonton Sun (Alberta)

                            July 29, 2009 Wednesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 318 words

HEADLINE: Swine-flu vaccine on the fast track

BYLINE: BY THE CANADIAN PRESS

DATELINE: TORONTO

BODY:

   As pharmaceutical companies rush to make swine-flu vaccine, regulators in
Canada, the U.S. and Europe are flipping into gear the plans they have honed
over several years on fast-tracking flu vaccine for a pandemic.

   The approaches are not identical, but are variations on a theme.

   Flu vaccines have been used safely for decades and this pandemic version is
just one more flu vaccine, they say.

   "Really, the same manufacturer will be making the same vaccine and it's just
considered as a (strain) switch," explains Dr. Elwyn Griffiths, director general
of the biologics and genetic therapies directorate, the section of Health Canada
that regulates vaccines. Though they work within the frameworks of different
laws, Health Canada, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration and the European
Medicines Agency (EMEA) all intend to treat the pandemic vaccine as a supplement
or amendment to existing flu vaccines licences, either for seasonal or pandemic
vaccine.

   The goal is to try to speed approval of the vaccine so that it can be used
before the pandemic is over -- if and when political or public health
authorities decide vaccinating all or parts of the population is the right way
to go.

   "Remember, these are two separate decisions," says Dr. Norman Baylor,
director of the FDA's office of vaccines research and review. Baylor uses his
hands during a recent meeting in Gaithersburg, Md., to explain the demarcation
between approving pandemic vaccine and ordering mass vaccination.

   "The decision to deploy the vaccine, that's over here. The decision to
license the vaccine, that's over here," he says, holding his hands out to
opposite sides of his body.

   The second "over here" is the realm of the regulatory agencies, which have
been working with the World Health Organization and each other for years
striking plans for how to respond to the special demands of a pandemic.

   The impetus was the dangerous bird-flu virus.

LOAD-DATE: July 29, 2009


                              43 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2009 Sun Media Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved
                             Edmonton Sun (Alberta)

                             March 7, 2009 Saturday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 39

LENGTH: 773 words

HEADLINE: Obama to OK stem cell research

BYLINE: BY BEN FELLER AND LAURAN NEERGAARD, THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   Reversing an eight-year-old limit on potentially life-saving science,
President Barack Obama plans to lift restrictions Monday on taxpayer-funded
research using embryonic stem cells.

   The long-promised move will allow a rush of research aimed at one day better
treating, if not curing, ailments from diabetes to paralysis -research that
crosses partisan lines.

   Embryonic stem cells are master cells that can morph into any cell of the
body. Scientists hope to harness them so they can create replacement tissues to
treat a variety of diseases, like new insulin-producing cells for diabetics,
cells that could help those with Parkinson's disease or Alzheimer's, or new
nerve connections to restore movement after spinal injury.

   "I feel vindicated after eight years of struggle, and I know it's going to
energize my research team," said Dr. George Daley of the Harvard Stem Cell
Institute and Children's Hospital of Boston, a leading stem cell researcher.

   But the research is controversial because days-old embryos must be destroyed
to obtain the cells. They typically are culled from fertility-clinic leftovers
otherwise destined to be thrown away.

   Under President George W. Bush, taxpayer money for research was limited to a
small number of stem cell lines - groups of cells that continue to propagate in
lab dishes - created before Aug. 9, 2001.

   But work didn't stop. Indeed, it advanced enough that this summer, the
private Geron Corp. will begin the world's first study of a treatment using
human embryonic stem cells in people who recently suffered a spinal cord injury.

   The aim of the policy is to restore "scientific integrity" to the process, a
senior administration official said yesterday.

   Nor does Obama's change fund creation of new lines. But it means scientists,
who until now had to rely on private donations to work with these newer stem
cell lines, can apply for government money for the research, just like they do
for studies of gene therapy or other treatment approaches.

   The aim of the policy is to restore "scientific integrity" to the process,
the administration official said.

   "America's biomedical research enterprise experienced steady decline over the
past eight years, with shrinking budgets and policies that elevated ideology
over science. This slowed the pace of discovery and the search for cures," said
Sean Morrison, director of the University of Michigan's Center for Stem Cell
Biology.

   Critics immediately denounced the move.

   "Taxpayers should not have to foot the bill for experiments that require the
destruction of human life," said Tony Perkins of the conservative Family
Research Council. "President Obama's policy change is especially troubling given
the significant adult stem cell advances that are being used to treat patients
now without harming or destroying human embryos."

   Indeed, there are different types of stem cells: So-called adult stem cells
that produce a specific type of tissue; younger stem cells found floating in
amniotic fluid or the placenta. Scientists even have learned to reprogram
certain cells to behave like stem cells.

   But even researchers who work with varying types consider embryonic stem
cells the most flexible and thus most promising form, and say that science, not
politics, should ultimately judge.

   "Science works best and patients are served best by having all the tools at
our disposal," Daley said.

   Obama made it clear during the campaign he would overturn Bush's directive.

   During the campaign, Obama said, "I strongly support expanding research on
stem cells. I believe that the restrictions that President Bush has placed on
funding of human embryonic stem cell research have handcuffed our scientists and
hindered our ability to compete with other nations."

   He said he would lift Bush's ban and "ensure that all research on stem cells
is conducted ethically and with rigorous oversight."

   "Patients and people who've been patient advocates are going to be really
happy," said Amy Comstock Rick of the Coalition for the Advancement of Medical
Research.

   The ruling will bring one immediate change: As of Monday, scientists who've
had to meticulously keep separate their federally funded research and their
privately funded stem cell work -- from buying separate microscopes to even
setting up labs in different buildings -- won't have that expensive hurdle
anymore.

   Next, scientists can start applying for research grants from the National
Institutes of Health. The NIH already has begun writing guidelines that, among
other things, are expected to demand that the cells being used were derived with
proper informed consent from the woman or couple who donated the original
embryo.

LOAD-DATE: March 7, 2009


                              49 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2008 Sun Media Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved
                             Edmonton Sun (Alberta)

                           August 20, 2008 Wednesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Discovery; Pg. 34

LENGTH: 330 words

HEADLINE: Gene doping;
Repoxygen is a new way to artificially enhance an athlete's performance -- one
that is hard to detect and with potentially permanent effects

BYLINE: BY FINDING THE GOLDEN GENES, PATRICK BARRY AND WWW.SCIENCENEWS.ORG

BODY:

   HOW IT WORKS

   Repoxygen was developed as a gene therapy treatment for severe anemia. A
patient is injected with a harmless virus carrying a modified gene that encodes
erythropoietin, a protein that boosts red blood cell production. The host's
cells can translate that gene into active proteins as if the foreign gene were
the cells' own.

   1. Delivery

   DNA packaged in a virus is injected into the athlete and flows through the
bloodstream into muscle.

   Danger: Altered viruses can trigger dangerous reactions from the immune
system.

   Alternatives: Viruses are not the only way to deliver performance-enhancing
genes to cells. Fat molecules or naked DNA can be injected directly into muscle.

   2. Change

   Viruses bind to muscle cells and deposit the foreign gene inside, where it
integrates into the cell's chromosomes. The gene stimulates the production of
the protein erythropoietin (EPO).

   Danger: Inserting foreign DNA can damage the cell's own genes, risking
cancer.

   Detection: Presence of a foreign gene in the athlete's DNA.

   3. Dispersal

   Erythropoietin (EPO), produced by the altered muscle cells, flows through the
bloodstream to bone marrow, stimulating production of red blood cells, the
body's main transporter of oxygen.

   Detection: Changes in the concentration of multiple proteins in the blood or
urine.

   4. Enhancement

   Extra red blood cells flow throughout the athlete's body, increasing oxygen
capacity and, hence, endurance.

   ---

   Other gene doping possibilities

   In 1988, H. Lee Sweeney and colleagues at the University of Pennsylvania
School of Medicine injected mice with a virus carrying a gene that boosted
production of insulin-growth factor (IGF-1). The injected mice had 15% more
muscle mass than untreated mice.

   In 2004, Ronald Evans and colleagues at California's Salk Institute for
Biological Studies engineered mice to have extra copies of the gene encoding a
protein called peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor delta (PPAR-delta).
These mice could run twice as far a unaltered mice.

GRAPHIC: graphic by Susie Mah, Sun Media

LOAD-DATE: August 20, 2008


                              51 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2008 Sun Media Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Toronto Sun

                           August 20, 2008 Wednesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Discovery; Pg. 40

LENGTH: 330 words

HEADLINE: Gene doping;
Repoxygen is a new way to artificially enhance an athlete's performance -- one
that is hard to detect and with potentially permanent effects

BYLINE: BY FINDING THE GOLDEN GENES, PATRICK BARRY AND WWW.SCIENCENEWS.ORG

BODY:

   HOW IT WORKS

   Repoxygen was developed as a gene therapy treatment for severe anemia. A
patient is injected with a harmless virus carrying a modified gene that encodes
erythropoietin, a protein that boosts red blood cell production. The host's
cells can translate that gene into active proteins as if the foreign gene were
the cells' own.

   1. DELIVERY

   DNA packaged in a virus is injected into the athlete and flows through the
bloodstream into muscle.

   Danger: Altered viruses can trigger dangerous reactions from the immune
system.

   Alternatives: Viruses are not the only way to deliver performance-enhancing
genes to cells. Fat molecules or naked DNA can be injected directly into muscle.

   2. CHANGE

   Viruses bind to muscle cells and deposit the foreign gene inside, where it
integrates into the cell's chromosomes. The gene stimulates the production of
the protein erythropoietin (EPO).

   Danger: Inserting foreign DNA can damage the cell's own genes, risking
cancer.

   Detection: Presence of a foreign gene in the athlete's DNA.

   3. DISPERSAL

   Erythropoietin (EPO), produced by the altered muscle cells, flows through the
bloodstream to bone marrow, stimulating production of red blood cells, the
body's main transporter of oxygen.

   Detection: Changes in the concentration of multiple proteins in the blood or
urine.

   4. ENHANCEMENT

   Extra red blood cells flow throughout the athlete's body, increasing oxygen
capacity and, hence, endurance.

   ---

   OTHER GENE DOPING POSSIBILITIES

   In 1988, H. Lee Sweeney and colleagues at the University of Pennsylvania
School of Medicine injected mice with a virus carrying a gene that boosted
production of insulin-growth factor (IGF-1). The injected mice had 15% more
muscle mass than untreated mice.

   In 2004, Ronald Evans and colleagues at California's Salk Institute for
Biological Studies engineered mice to have extra copies of the gene encoding a
protein called peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor delta (PPAR-delta).
These mice could run twice as far a unaltered mice.

GRAPHIC: graphic by Susie Mah, Sun Media

LOAD-DATE: August 20, 2008


                              52 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2008 Sun Media Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved
                             Edmonton Sun (Alberta)

                            August 7, 2008 Thursday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. S4

LENGTH: 257 words

HEADLINE: Alternatives

BYLINE: BY BILL LANKHOF

BODY:

   Ten performance enhancers -- some legal some not -- with which athletes are
experimenting and may show up in Beijing:

   BREAST MILK

   Taken because it contains betahydroxy betamethylbutyrate HMB, a metabolite
also found in citrus fruits. HMB is popular because it increases muscle size and
allows faster muscle repair.

   COBALT

   A newer version of blood-doping that targets genes with essential roles in
cell and tissue adaptation to low oxygen. It is not banned and therefore would
not be detected in testing.

   EMOTOCEUTICALS

   Drugs such as Neurodex, which affect emotions, and are said to clear the
mind.

   VIAGRA

   Legal drug. Opens blood vessels, allowing transfer of oxygen to be increased.

   TATTOOING

   A less detectable form of delivering drugs into the system than injecting.

   IGF-1

   Insulin Growth Factor-1 is a hormone produced in the body by the liver. It's
been part of the sports underground since 2005.

   GENE MANIPULATION

   The "exercise pill" is a drug containing DNA isolated for endurance and fat
metabolism. Drug testers have been predicting gene manipulation for nearly a
decade.

   REPOXYGEN

   Gene therapy which has already attracted attention for its ability to improve
oxygen flow to muscles and use of energy.

   ADDERALL

   Cognitive enhancer was popular among students for all-nighters during exam
time. As a prescribed drug it's used for people with attention deficit
hyperactivity disorder.

   EPO VARIANTS

   Hematide, or other artificial blood and plasma expanders and oxygen carrier
products.Hermatide is undergoing studies in the U.S. to potentially help kidney
patients.

LOAD-DATE: August 7, 2008


                              53 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2008 Sun Media Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Toronto Sun

                            August 6, 2008 Wednesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. S2

LENGTH: 1065 words

HEADLINE: Let cheating begin;
Two decades after Ben Johnson, it's the same old story

BYLINE: BY BILL LANKHOF, TORONTO SUN

BODY:

   The Beijing Games begin in two days -- a quadrennial celebration of sporting
excellence that brings together some of the most renowned athletes ever to
widdle in a bottle.

   It is 20 summers ago that Ben Johnson crossed the finish line in 9.79 seconds
at Seoul and raised his hand to the world, signifying that he was No. 1. When it
came to what the world would think of him, it turns out he missed by one finger.

   He was vilified by the media, crucified by his peers and investigated by a
sanctimonious sporting officialdom that portrayed him as an abhorant aberration.

   Two decades later, it is evident that Johnson was many things. An aberration
is not one of them. Johnson may be the poster boy for steroid abuse, but he was
right about one thing: He was a fall guy. Rather than being the exception,
Johnson turned out to be just the tip of the iceberg. It could be argued that
while the Olympics bring together the sultans of sweat, they are just as much a
gathering of the most accomplished cheaters this side of your average day-time
soap opera.

   SIMPLER ERAS

   In simpler Olympic eras, the first one to the finish line was the winner.
Now, nobody knows who wins until some whiz kid with the World Anti-Doping Agency
comes out of the little boys room wearing a happy face.

   When Johnson tested positive for stanozolol, it shocked Canadians, not to
mention Johnson who, to this day, claims he never took the steroid, although he
does admit to using farazobol. A nation already suffering from an inferiority
complex -- exacerbated by living next to a flag-waving America -- was
embarrassed and humiliated as a brash Carl Lewis smugly accepted the gold medal
that was Johnson's.

   Since then, we have learned many things -- among them being that Lewis and
America had no reason to act smugly. And, if we as Canadians were cheating,
well, we didn't have any reason to feel more embarrassed than anyone else in the
world.

   Twenty years later, we are not so easily scandalized. In America, NFL players
have died from the effects of steroids. Baseball's image will forever be scarred
by BALCO and a bogus home-run king. Congressional investigations turned Mark
McGwire from icon to cheat. Roger Clemens, the best pitcher of the past two
decades, is an accussed juicer. In France, the greatest cycling race in the
world turned out to have more needlers than the average village quilters' bee.

   As for Johnson, he might turn out to be the only guy in that 100-metre final
in Seoul to come clean -- so to speak.

   American's Dennis Mitchell, who accepted the bronze medal when Johnson was
stripped, was subsequently banned from track for drug abuse. Silver-medallist,
Linford Christie, who also tested positive in Seoul but successfully argued that
he had taken the substance inadvertently while drinking ginseng tea, was caught
by the steroid police years later.

   Lewis was the teflon champion for years. He was cleared of wrong-doing when
he claimed he innocently had taken a cold medicine containing banned stimulants
even though three separate substances, including the contentious ephedrine, had
been found in his samples.

   "He's the biggest hypocrite of them all," Johnson told Jeff Powell of the
London Evening Standard in a recent interview. "I knew Carl had tested positive
three times before Seoul and the Americans had let him off because they were
terrified I would take their precious gold."

   Other stars have fallen since. The denials of Tim Montgomery were exposed.
Marion Jones went from the darling of American track to a jail cell.

   Which bring us to Beijing. Let the cheating begin. As long as there has been
sport, there has been someone young enough, someone impressionable enough,
someone feeling bullet-proof enough and someone desperate enough to get an edge
to experiment with the latest technology. So, the world doping agency has just
found a method to test for the third generation of EPO, catching Tour de France
cyclist Ricardo Riccoc. Just as quickly come new methods to enhance performance.
The number of athletes using them is arguable. That a number of athletes are
using them no longer is.

   So, Viagra, a legal drug which opens up the blood vessels, is used because it
allows the transfer of oxygen to be increased.

   Researchers at the German Cancer Research Centre in Heidelberg showed this
year that delivering drugs by tattooing was 16 times more effective than
injecting intramuscularly or intravenously. As well, because they could be
delivered in smaller doses and much slower it makes them harder to detect.

   Then there is the "exercise pill," a drug containing DNA isolated for
endurance and fat metabolism. In studies, mice fed the pill showed improvements
in running time of 44% to 70%.

   So, on the 20th anniversary of Johnson's run into infamy this is a certainty:
Faces change. Names change. Drugs change. The story never does.

   ---

   ALTERNATIVES

   Ten performance enhancers -- some legal some not -- with which athletes are
experimenting and may show up in Beijing:

   BREAST MILK

   Taken because it contains betahydroxy betamethylbutyrate HMB, a metabolite
also found in citrus fruits. HMB is popular because it increases muscle size and
allows faster muscle repair.

   COBALT

   A newer version of blood-doping that targets genes with essential roles in
cell and tissue adaptation to low oxygen. It is not banned and therefore would
not be detected in testing.

   EMOTOCEUTICALS

   Drugs such as Neurodex, which affect emotions, and are said to clear the
mind.

   VIAGRA

   Legal drug. Opens blood vessels, allowing transfer of oxygen to be increased.

   TATTOOING

   A less detectable form of delivering drugs into the system than injecting.

   IGF-1

   Insulin Growth Factor-1 is a hormone produced in the body by the liver. It's
been part of the sports underground since 2005.

   GENE MANIPULATION

   The "exercise pill" is a drug containing DNA isolated for endurance and fat
metabolism. Drug testers have been predicting gene manipulation for nearly a
decade.

   REPOXYGEN

   Gene therapy which has already attracted attention for its ability to improve
oxygen flow to muscles and use of energy.

   ADDERALL

   Cognitive enhancer was popular among students for all-nighters during exam
time. As a prescribed drug it's used for people with attention deficit
hyperactivity disorder.

   EPO VARIANTS

   Hematide, or other artificial blood and plasma expanders and oxygen carrier
products.Hermatide is undergoing studies in the U.S. to potentially help kidney
patients.

GRAPHIC: 1. file photo by Stan Behal, Sun Media Canadian Ben Johnson signals
that he is No. 1 after winning the 100 metres in Seoul 20 years ago. He was off
by one digit. 2. photo of CARL LEWIS Teflon champ

LOAD-DATE: August 6, 2008


                              56 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2008 Sun Media Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Toronto Sun

                             June 12, 2008 Thursday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. S15

LENGTH: 375 words

HEADLINE: WADA working on gene doping detection

BYLINE: BY SUN WIRE SERVICES

BODY:

   The World Anti-Doping Agency wants to stay ahead of the game on gene doping.

   Although there's no hard evidence that athletes are doing it, WADA is
concerned about the potential for gene doping -- the illegal use of gene therapy
, which typically alters a person's DNA to fight diseases -- to enhance
performance.

   The agency used a St. Petersburg, Russia, conference on the issue to call on
the worlds of sports and science to work together to raise awareness of the
issue -- and find ways to catch and punish anyone involved.

   WADA vice-president Arne Ljungqvist said scientists working on gene therapy
are being approached by sports figures interested in performance enhancement.

   "We need to make sure that athletes know the dangers associated with these
technologies and, for those who may choose to ignore them and cheat, that they
will be caught," Ljungqvist said.

   It was unclear when that will be possible.

   GOOD START FOR CANADA

   The Canadian field hockey team started their 12-day European tour with a 1-0
win over Great Britain in Dublin.

   Michael Mahood, of North Vancouver, B.C., stood tall in net for the Canadians
while Peter Short scored the game's only goal early in the second half.

   Canada, ranked 15th by the International Hockey Federation, is in Ireland and
the Netherlands preparing for the Beijing Games.

   Canada will take on Ireland this afternoon and Pakistan on Saturday.

   EQUESTRIAN WITHDRAWS

   Zara Phillips, a granddaughter of Queen Elizabeth, pulled out of the Beijing
Olympics equestrian competition because of an injury to her horse.

   The 26-year-old Phillips had been among five riders selected to the eventing
team by the British Olympic Association and was considered a strong medal
contender.

   But she was forced to withdraw after her horse Toytown was injured in
training

   A reserve rider and horse combination will be selected by the BOA.

   D'ARCY REJECTED

   Nick D'Arcy had no better result with the entire Australian Olympic Committee
than he did with its president John Coates: The swimmer won't be allowed to go
to Beijing because of assault charges stemming from a bar fight.

   The full executive board of the AOC rejected an argument submitted by D'Arcy
and his legal team that he is a fit and proper person to represent his country
at the Olympics.

LOAD-DATE: June 12, 2008


                              59 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2008 Sun Media Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved
                             Edmonton Sun (Alberta)

                             April 28, 2008 Monday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 52

LENGTH: 410 words

HEADLINE: Breakthrough in gene therapy;
Treatment helps rare form of blindness

BYLINE: BY AP

DATELINE: NEW YORK

BODY:

   Scientists for the first time have used gene therapy to dramatically improve
sight in people with a rare form of blindness, a development experts called a
major advance for the experimental technique.

   Some vision was restored in four of the six young people who got the
treatment, teams of researchers in the U.S. and Britain reported yesterday.

   Two volunteers, who could only see hand motions, were able to read a few
lines of an eye chart within weeks, and four could see better in dim light.

   "It's a phenomenal breakthrough," said Stephen Rose, chief research officer
of the Foundation Fighting Blindness, which helped pay for one study done at
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia.

   If successful in larger numbers, experts said, the technique has the
potential to reverse blindness from other inherited eye diseases.

   "I think this is incredibly exciting," said Dr. Jean Bennett, a professor of
ophthalmology at the University of Pennsylvania and a leader of the Philadelphia
study. "It's the beginning of a whole new phase of studies."

   The research was published online yesterday by the New England Journal of
Medicine (www.nejm.org) in conjunction with presentations at a medical meeting
in Florida.

   The two teams of scientists, working separately, each tested gene replacement
therapy in three patients with a form of a rare hereditary eye disease called
Leber's congenital amaurosis. There's no treatment for the disease, which
appears early in infancy and causes severe vision loss, especially at night.

   An estimated 2,000 Americans have the form of the disease targeted, Bennett
said.

   Each study participant had mutations in a gene that makes a protein needed by
the retina, which senses light and sends images to the brain. Those without the
gene gradually lose sight until they are blind in early adulthood.

   For the experiment, the scientists injected millions of copies of a working
gene beneath the retina in the back of the eye. Only one eye was treated - the
worse one - in case anything went wrong; the untreated eye was used for
comparison. After the treatment, their eyesight and light sensitivity were
measured periodically; mobility was tested in a maze or an obstacle course.

   All three of those treated in Philadelphia, ages 19 to 26, showed significant
improvement in their vision over a six-month followup, the researchers said. In
the British group, the treatment only worked in Steven Howarth, 18, whose
disease was less advanced than the other two.

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 2008


                              67 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2007 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved
                    The Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                            December 24, 2007 Monday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: CANADA/WORLD; Pg. A10

LENGTH: 256 words

HEADLINE: 'Bubble baby' set for first Christmas out of hospital

BYLINE: Moncton Times and Transcript

DATELINE: CENTREVILLE, N.B.

BODY:

   Two-year-old Katlyn DeMerchant is getting ready to experience her first
Christmas outside of the sterile hospital room where she has been confined for
most of her life.

   The New Brunswick girl, who is known in the province as the "bubble baby,"
was diagnosed with severe combined immunodeficiency, an extremely rare genetic
disorder that left her with virtually no immune system.

   But thanks to experimental gene therapy she received at an American hospital,
this year she's spending Christmas at home.

   "It's just so, so normal," says Katlyn's mother, Daisy Gallant, when asked
about her daughter's first Christmas out of hospital.

   "It's overwhelming. I get a little teary-eyed ... She's two years old and I'm
experiencing all this stuff for the first time."

   Earlier this year, Katlyn was selected as one of the few people in the world
to undergo the gene therapy at the National Institute of Health in Bethesda, Md.

   The therapy, followed by chemotherapy, seems to be working.

   After weeks of followup care at the IWK Health Centre in Halifax, Katlyn has
rejoined her family at their home in Centreville, N.B. Katlyn can now even go
outside without wearing a mask.

   The past two year's haven't easy for the family.

   Johnathan DeMerchant was absent from work for so long caring for his daughter
that he lost his job, while Gallant's full-time job has been looking after
Katlyn.

   "It's been very stressful for us," says Gallant. And there are still
challenges.

   The family's house required significant changes to accommodate Katlyn's
still-precarious health.

LOAD-DATE: December 24, 2007


                              73 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2007 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved
                    The Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                              July 3, 2007 Tuesday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: WELL-BEING; Pg. G06

LENGTH: 528  words

HEADLINE: Health news

BYLINE: The Hamilton Spectator

BODY:

   Fake toothpaste contains dangerous bacteria

   Health Canada is warning Canadians to stay away from counterfeit toothpaste
in stores as the RCMP launches a criminal probe into the matter.

   The affected products have been falsely labelled as Colgate Fluoride
Toothpaste Herbal and Colgate Fluoride Toothpaste Maximum Cavity Protection.

   Health Canada says the fake toothpaste contains high levels of dangerous
bacteria.

   People who ingest the tainted toothpaste could suffer such symptoms as fever,
vomiting, diarrhea and abdominal pain. The effects are worse in infants,
children and people with weakened immune systems.

   The counterfeit products' labels include a number of typos.

   The approved toothpaste would contain ID numbers and bilingual packaging --
features not found on the counterfeit brands.

   Agency urges leg exercises to reduce risk of blood clots

   The World Health Organization has warned that passengers on long flights
should exercise their legs and resist taking sleeping pills to reduce the risk
of potentially fatal blood clots.

   Although the danger of developing deep vein thrombosis -- normally in the
form of a blood clot in the calves -- is small, it increases if people are
immobile for long periods in cramped conditions.

   The UN agency bases its recommendations on research done by scientists in
Britain, Switzerland and the Netherlands after the death in 2000 of a
28-year-old British woman following a long flight from Australia.

   The WHO says studies showed the risk of developing blood clots during any
form of travel longer than four hours translates into one case for every 15
fully booked jumbo jets.

   Ontario urged to probe chemicals in water supply

   Ontario must do more to investigate whether potentially dangerous chemicals
in the water supply coming from everyday pharmaceuticals and personal care
products (PPCPs) pose a threat to people's health and the ecosystem, the
province's environmental commissioner says.

   There is a pressing need not just to monitor the spread of PPCPs, but to
spend millions on research and get on top of the threat posed, Gord Miller said.

   The chemicals, which are showing up in water around the world, come from farm
activity, antibiotics or discarded medication poured down the toilet or sink,
medication found in human waste, and run-off from antibacterial soaps and
shampoos.

   They travel through the septic system and can make their way back into source
and drinking water because sewage treatment plants aren't equipped to get rid of
them.

   Studies suggest PPCPs can contribute to infertility in animals, delayed
reproductive development, damage to the liver and kidneys and antibiotic
resistance.

   Gene therapy may ease Parkinson's

   An experimental treatment for Parkinson's disease is showing preliminary
promise for easing the disease.

   Dr. Michael Kaplitt of Weill Cornell Medical College in New York said the
gene therapy treatment involves slipping billions of copies of a gene into the
brain to calm overactive brain circuitry.

   The small study focused on testing the safety of the procedure rather than
its effectiveness. But experts call the results promising.

   -- Compiled by Florence Sicoli from Hamilton Spectator news services

LOAD-DATE: July 3, 2007


                              80 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2007 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved
                    The Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                             March 30, 2007 Friday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. SP08

LENGTH: 1364  words

HEADLINE: Rapid rate of recovery; Stem cells could be the way of the future in
healing sports injuries, enabling athletes to regrow damaged ligaments

BYLINE: Bill Pennington, New York Times News Service

BODY:

   The latest curative leap to heal professional athletes and weekend warriors
alike may sound like science fiction, but it could transform sports medicine.
Some doctors and researchers say that in a few years the use of primitive stem
cells from infants' umbilical cord blood could grow new knee ligaments or elbow
tendons creating a therapy that becomes the vanguard of sports injury repair.

   Already, some sports agents are preparing to advise clients about banking
stem cells from their offspring or from tissue taken from their own bodies as an
insurance policy against a career-ending infirmity. Stem cell blood banks are
promoting the benefits of stem cell therapies for the practical healing and
rehabilitation of tendons, ligaments, muscle and cartilage. There are skeptics
in the medical community who wonder how soon the technology will be viable, but
enthusiastic advocates of the therapies say the time is near.

   "It's not a pie-in-the-sky notion," said Dr. Scott Rodeo, an orthopedist and
award-winning research scientist at Manhattan's Hospital for Special Surgery.
"Maybe it's not going to happen next year, but a three-to-five-year horizon is
not unreasonable."

   Rodeo has already practised these technologies in laboratory surgeries on
rats, methods that will be especially useful when reconstructing the knee's
anterior cruciate ligament and the shoulder's rotator cuff. Both are common
sports maladies that can be particularly daunting to surgeons because the body
generally does not mend or restore the damaged tissue after these injuries.

   "In each case, stem cells clearly have some beneficial role in inducing
tissue regeneration," said Rodeo, who is also a team physician with the New York
Giants and a former U.S. Olympic team doctor.

   Some scientists say now is the time to safeguard athletic prodigies, even
kindergartners.

   "If you have a child who has exceptional athletic talent at the age of 5 or
6, you might want to get a muscle or fat biopsy to draw and freeze some young
stem cells," said Dr. Johnny Huard, the director of the Stem Cell Research
Center of the Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh and a leading gene therapy
researcher.

   "To have a pool of stem cells already removed would be enormously valuable.
The practical use might be years away, but that's the future of sports
medicine."

   The kinds of stem cell therapies being researched for the most part do not
involve the politically sensitive use of embryonic stem cells. But they could
involve using harvested adult stem cells, stem cells saved from a child at birth
or cells from what may someday be a national bank of donated stem cells derived
from umbilical cord or placental stem cells.

   While the stem cell therapies have gone beyond the theoretical stage, not
everyone in orthopedics is convinced they will be useful in treating top
athletes or anyone else.

   Dr. Regis O'Keefe, spokesperson for and Fellow of the American Academy of
Orthopaedic Surgery, said attempts to use regenerated cartilage in knees has so
far been "not highly effective." He noted that there have been no peer- reviewed
studies for many of the proposed therapies and limited experimentation in
humans.

   "There is a potential benefit but it's going to take years of clinical trials
to acquire the scientific knowledge to know this is better than the current
alternatives," said O'Keefe, who directs musculoskeletal research at the
University of Rochester Medical Center. "And without those trials we also cannot
properly evaluate the risks."

   Dr. Freddie Fu, a pioneering orthopedic surgeon with the University of
Pittsburgh Medical Center, agreed. "You have to answer safety questions and look
for side effects," he said. "It will also be quite expensive. Then again,
knowing professional athletes, none of that will stop them. They will always be
willing to try anything to help them play."

   With stem cell technology advancing, some are acting now to prepare for the
wealth of restorative possibilities.

   Five professional soccer players had their children's stem cells frozen at
birth and stored in a Liverpool stem cell bank, according to a story last year
in The Sunday Times of London. One of the players called the stem cells a
potential repair kit for a career-threatening injury.

   Stem cell therapies could do more than refurbish joints, they could help
build muscle in elite athletes and increase other physical capacities at a pace
and proficiency not conventionally attainable.

   "There is a performance- enhancing possibility to all this," said Huard, who
added that he has met with doping officials who are trying to prepare for the
new technology.

   "It might not be detectable because nothing is unnatural -- they are your own
cells. I don't think you could turn a bad athlete into a super athlete, but
could you provide the edge that turns an Olympic silver medal winner into an
Olympic gold medal winner? I think you could.

   "At the same time, will this kind of engineering of the body hold up under
the strain of competition at that level? How will it work in an intense, high
impact situation like a pro football game?"

   Arthur Caplan, director of the Center of Bioethics at the University of
Pennsylvania, believes prosperous professional athletes will view the emerging
stem cell technology as a fountain of youth.

   "It all sounds good to them," Caplan said. "They'll charge in head first. But
there's danger in that."

   Leigh Steinberg, a veteran sports agent, conceded that the top sports stars
in the United States would zealously pursue each orthopedic breakthrough.

   "For good or ill, athletes have always been in the forefront of every new
medical technique," Steinberg said. "Whether it's the use of human growth
hormone or arthroscopic surgery, they are the workers in society whose
livelihood most depends on their physical condition. If the medicine is proven
out and it's the difference between being able to play four more years at $8
million US a year, every athlete will consider it a godsend."

   Steinberg said he expected to soon begin advising clients to bank their
offspring's umbilical cord stem cells, something Steinberg did when his own
children were born.

   In future years, if the use of the stem cell technology in sports becomes
more widespread, it leaves open the possibility of professional athletes
considering a pregnancy -- or artificially creating one -- solely to aid their
ability to sign another $40-million US contract.

   "Something like that does make me nervous," said Dr. G. Lynn Lashbrook, an
Oregon-based agent, teacher and director of the Sports Management Worldwide
Agency. "The athletic world is renown for not controlling its ethical compass."

   At the facilities storing stem cells, where samplings from the best U.S.
athletes or their offspring may already be frozen, confidentially agreements
prevent officials from revealing the names of clients.

   "Our bank does include people with strong athletic backgrounds," said Dr.
Robert Hariri, founder and chief executive of LifebankUSA, one of about 25
private cord blood banks in the United States.

   Prices for collecting and storing blood vary widely. Hariri's facility, in
Cedar Knolls, N.J., has about 35,000 units of stem cells; donors can have
umbilical cord blood stored for about $1,900, plus $125 a year.

   The primary uses to date for cord blood have been in the treatment of
leukemia and other life-threatening diseases.

   "The focus so far has been on more important things than fixing an athlete's
joints," Hariri said. "But we're well aware of the possibilities and the
revolution that is coming."

   In the front lines of the revolution will likely be the best-paid athletes of
the world.

   "Take David Beckham as an example," Lashbrook said, referring to the English
soccer star who recently signed a $250-million US contract to play for the Los
Angeles Galaxy.

   "If in a few years he had a knee injury, given the money at stake, what would
be more paramount than getting him back on the field? His lifeblood and the
franchise lifeblood would be dependant on the knee getting better as quickly as
possible.

   "So it is not a stretch to say that they would turn to the most advanced
science available. Wherever it's available, I might add. History proves that."

GRAPHIC: Photo: Fred R.. Conrad , the New York Times , CORD BANKS. Umbilical
cord blood is being prepared for storage at LifebankUSA in Cedar Knolls, N.J.
There are about 25 cord blood banks in the United States.; Photo: Hamilton
Spectator File Photo , LOTS OF QUESTIONS. One doctor has wondered if this kind
of engineering of the body would 'hold up under the strain of competition at the
professional level? How will it work in an intense, high impact situation like a
pro football game?'; Photo: Hamilton Spectator File Photo , ARMS RACE. Jays
hurler A.J. Burnett has had elbow problems in the past.

LOAD-DATE: March 30, 2007


                              86 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2007 Sun Media Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved
                             Edmonton Sun (Alberta)

                           February 3, 2007 Saturday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 35

LENGTH: 313 words

HEADLINE: Acclaimed scientist jailed for sex abuse

BYLINE: BY REUTERS

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES

BODY:

   A top U.S. scientist known as the "father of gene therapy" was sentenced
yesterday to 14 years in prison for molesting a young girl after his victim told
the court that the sex abuse nearly drove her to suicide.

   William French Anderson, who won international acclaim for his work as a
geneticist, was convicted in July of sexually abusing the girl, who is now 19,
over several years starting when she was nine.

   Anderson denied the charges at trial and his lawyers argued that he was
guilty only of pressuring the girl to do well in school. The 70-year-old
scientist resigned in September from the University of Southern California Gene
Therapy Laboratories.

   The sentence was handed down after the victim, who travelled to Los Angeles
from the Midwestern college she now attends, told the court that she would live
with the pain of the molestation for the rest of her life.

   "It didn't just end after he took away my chance of having a normal
childhood," she said. "It didn't just end after he tried to rip apart my family.
It didn't just end when I was on the edge of suicide in high school. It didn't
just end when I finally went to the police or when he was convicted and it isn't
going to just end today."

   Defence lawyers asked for leniency based in part on Anderson's age, saying a
long prison term would amount to a death sentence. Anderson argued that he
should remain free so that his research could benefit society, and he was joined
in that request by several prominent scientists.

   But Superior Court Judge Michael Pastor said he wished those who wrote on
Anderson's behalf had heard the evidence.

   "The conduct of Dr. Anderson over the years is egregious," Pastor said. "Dr.
Anderson is brilliant, sophisticated, worldly and he is a manager and
administrator used to making tough decisions. He made the conscious decision to
continue to engage in the most reprehensible conduct."

GRAPHIC: photo by AP Geneticist Dr. William French Anderson seen in file photo.

LOAD-DATE: February 3, 2007


                              89 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2006 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved
                    The Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                            December 15, 2006 Friday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. SP07

LENGTH: 793  words

HEADLINE: Gene doping is next hurdle sports officials must tackle

BYLINE: The Associated Press

DATELINE: LONDON

BODY:

   Scientists are racing to develop a test to catch athletes who try to boost
their performance by manipulating their own genes.

   Though there is no proof that gene doping is already occurring, researchers
say they would like to be ready ahead of the 2008 Beijing Olympics. Gene doping
is an illegal spin-off of gene therapy, which typically alters a person's DNA to
fight diseases like muscular dystrophy and cystic fibrosis.

   Detecting minor genetic changes within the body's own structure is almost
impossible. While no commercial test exists to identify gene doping, scientists
are exploring various hypotheses they hope will soon pan out.

   Even if a test does not become available until after the Olympics,
authorities have the power to test samples taken from the competition for up to
eight years after the events have taken place.

   "The approach to detect gene doping is coming," said Dr. Theodore Friedmann,
a gene therapy expert at the University of California, San Diego. "No one should
think that they will be able to hide the evidence of a genetic change."

   At the World Anti-Doping Association, researchers are trying to track the
immune traces left by the viruses commonly used in gene doping.

   Because gene transfer is still very experimental, there are significant risks
for anyone modifying their own genes.

   "In the name of healing, patients and doctors may accept the risks if there
is a chance that the patients will recover," Friedmann said. "But in the name of
changing the outcome of a sporting event, it would be tragic to see a healthy,
young athlete be harmed by manipulating his genes."

   Gene transfers are most effectively performed with viruses, which have first
had any dangerous properties removed. In most cases, viruses tend to leave
behind incriminating antibodies.

   "The body reacts to the presence of any viruses and develops an immune
response that can be monitored," said Dr. Olivier Rabin, WADA's science
director.

   Because it is virtually impossible to identify the individual gene altered,
researchers are also focusing on the secondary impact such changes would
provoke.

   "If you perturb a biological system, you'll get all kinds of changes in the
homeostasis to keep it functioning," Friedmann said.

   Friedmann and his colleagues are researching a gene doping test in mice that
attempts to identify the molecular changes following a gene mutation.

   "We're finding families of genes that unexpectedly change in response to an
alteration at the genetic level," Friedmann said. "Those genes can constitute a
molecular signature for the system having been disturbed."

   Identifying this genetic signature would be like catching a gene-doping
athlete red-handed.

   Not knowing precisely which genetic changes to look for complicates
scientists' search for a test. But it also poses a serious health risk to the
athletes who may be tempted to modify their genes.

   Traditional drug doping enhances the body's potential dramatically -- but is
still bound by the body's own limits. In contrast, gene doping removes these
limits altogether.

   "You're changing the blueprint of what Mother Nature intended," said Dr. Todd
Schlifstein, an assistant professor at New York University School of Medicine.
Such a radical step, Schlifstein says, may have unexpected and unpredictable
medical consequences.

   This has already been seen in athletes who have illegally increased their
levels of repoxygen, which gives the body the gene needed to produce
erythropoietin (EPO), a naturally occurring hormone that stimulates the
production of red blood cells. Having more red blood cells can increase an
athlete's stamina since the cells carry oxygen. But red blood cells are also
thicker than regular blood cells.

   "Having extra red blood cells can make your blood sludge. The body wasn't
made to have its underlying mechanism changed," Schlifstein said, adding that an
athlete with excess levels of red blood cells is susceptible to a clot, stroke
or heart attack.

   The precision required in gene therapy also means there may be significant
risks if the gene is not reinserted correctly.

   "If the gene happens to hit some oncogenes, it could send a message to other
cells to become cancer cells," Rabin said.

   In cases where growth hormones are stimulated, it is also possible that very
early cancers, which may not yet have been detected, could have their growth
dramatically accelerated.

   Because gene transfer is still very experimental, there are significant risks
for anyone modifying their own genes.

   "In the name of healing, patients and doctors may accept the risks if there
is a chance that the patients will recover," Friedmann said. "But in the name of
changing the outcome of a sporting event, it would be tragic to see a healthy,
young athlete be harmed by manipulating his genes."

LOAD-DATE: December 15, 2006


                              90 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2006 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved
                    The Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                          December 13, 2006 Wednesday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: WELL-BEING; Pg. G08

LENGTH: 455  words

HEADLINE: Health news

BYLINE: Compiled Florence Sicoli, Hamilton Spectator news services

BODY:

   Drug for hair loss reduces PSA count

   Men who take a drug to reduce hair loss may also be reducing their levels of
PSA, a marker for prostate cancer.

   That may sound like a good thing, but while the drug lowers the level of PSA,
it does not lower the risk of cancer. In fact, a new study reports, doctors
could be misled into concluding that a patient's risk is lower than it really
is.

   Writing in The Lancet, researchers said the drug they looked at, Proscar,
could halve the blood levels of PSA (prostate-specific antigen). It is not known
whether a close cousin of Proscar, Propecia, has the same effect.

   Because many men consider hair-loss medicines to be "lifestyle drugs," they
often neglect to mention them to their doctors.

   Study shows hysteria symptoms are real

   A new study has found that people who suffer from hysteria -- often
experiencing numbness in their extremities along one side of their body -- may
not be imagining their symptoms after all.

   Researchers at Toronto's Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre say they can see
evidence of the condition on an MRI scan.

   They say that a part of the brain that normally responds to touch was
inactive when the numb body part was stimulated -- proof that the symptoms
really exist.

   The study appears in the yesterday's issue of the journal Neurology.

   Spinal fluid could hold Alzheimer's marker

   Scientists appear to have found a fingerprint of Alzheimer's disease lurking
in patients' spinal fluid.

   Researchers at New York's Weill Cornell Medical College discovered a pattern
of 23 proteins floating in spinal fluid that, in preliminary testing, seems to
identify Alzheimer's with fairly good accuracy.

   Specialists in the field say far more research is needed before doctors could
try spinal-tap tests in people worried they might have Alzheimer's disease.

   But Weill Cornell researchers are already preparing for larger studies to see
if this potential biomarker of Alzheimer's disease holds up.

   Their research is reported in yesterday's issue of Neurology.

   Gene therapy for rare cardiovascular disease

   TORONTO An experimental gene and cell therapy for a rare cardiovascular
disease that predominantly affects young women has been developed by researchers
in Toronto, CTV News reported this week.

   It is the first therapy of this kind for pulmonary arterial hypertension,
which causes arteries to become blocked, the network reported.

   Drug treatments are available, but most patients die within five years of
diagnosis.

   Dr. Duncan Stewart and his research team developed a way to inject
genetically engineered, stemlike cells into the lungs.

   The gene produces nitric oxide, which helps grow and repair blood vessels.

   CTV says doctors plan to test the therapy on 18 patients during the next 18
months.

GRAPHIC: Graphic : hysteria

LOAD-DATE: December 13, 2006


                              92 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2006 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved
                    The Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                            November 17, 2006 Friday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: JOURNAL; Pg. G05

LENGTH: 1693  words

HEADLINE: ... And then there was light; McMaster scientists are working on a
revolutionary light bulb in the tiny, tiny world of nanophysics -- where they
come face to face with the physics of God

BYLINE: Mike Pettapiece, Special to The Hamilton Spectator

BODY:

   Jacek Wojcik is taking the tiniest steps toward a titanic change in our world
--by working with particles 1,000 times smaller than bacteria.

   The McMaster researcher is helping make something that's revolutionary
although not frightening to us -- a new bulb to light our homes.

   But down here -- in this unimaginably tiny world -- scientists are coming
face to face with the physics of God. And because of that, some of its most
vocal opponents argue, mankind is playing God.

   If all goes well, Wojcik's project will be a blessing to us. The solid-state
light bulbs he's working on will use 90 per cent less energy than an
incandescent bulb. They'll last for decades. The prize is a piece of the
$12-billion US global illumination market.

   "I think it's very exciting, almost like a sort of Holy Grail," says Wojcik
who works in the university's Centre for Emerging-Device Technologies. "You want
to be part of something that creates a big change."

   But the big dream starts at the tiny world our naked eyes can't see -- the
world of atoms and molecules, of nanotechnology. Wojcik and other researchers at
McMaster work on particles 10 to 15 nanometres wide.

   A nanometre -- nanos, from the ancient Greek, means dwarf -- is a billionth
of a metre, less than one/100,000th the width of a human hair. Nanotechnology is
an umbrella term that covers a host of processes and technologies dealing with
this ultra-tiny world. At this scale, researchers no longer toil at trial and
error, intuition and inference. They can actually see atoms, can see how
research succeeds or fails.

   McMaster helped develop the technology and co-owns the patents with an Ottawa
company.

   Wojcik is one of more than 500 McMaster researchers who work in
nanotechnology in many fields.

   Nano-investigators know, in an often-bizarre reversal of the size-does-count
cliché, that particles at atomic scale can exhibit different physical properties
than they do at normal size.

   "Silicon under normal circumstances does not emit light," says Peter Mascher,
a Mac engineering physics prof and holder of an endowed research chair. "It only
emits light when you get down to the nano-scale."

   Similarly, gold is yellow. But gold in nano-size, where the electrons are
restricted in their movement and gravity cedes to electromagnetic forces, takes
on a red hue as it reacts with light.

   Indeed, some of the claims made for it seem beyond mortal. Proponents say
nanotechnology has the potential to produce:

   * 'Bio-bombs' that recognize, target and kill disease cells in the body

   * 'Space elevators' of nanotubes that ferry satellites aloft

   * Ultra-tiny tools

   * Metals and coatings that will cut auto emissions and energy usage

   * 'Smart-shirts' to monitor the health of old people living alone.

   But perhaps the most outrageous claim made is this: It will dramatically
reverse human aging.

   Said inventor and visionary Ray Kurzweil in 2003: "We will be able to keep
our bodies and brains in a healthy, optimal state indefinitely... Nanotechnology
will (help us) overcome age-old problems, including pollution, poverty, disease
and aging."

   Companies and countries are digging deep. In 2003, U.S. President George
W.Bush signed a bill allocating $3.7 billion US for nanotechnology.

   In Canada, Ottawa alone (never mind the provinces) is investing more than
$400 million, including money for a new nanotechnology institute in Edmonton
that opened this summer.

   New York City-based Lux Research estimates that global spending on nanotech
research and development reached almost $10 billion US last year. By 2015, much
of technology may be nanotechnology.

   Nanotechnology will be part of the mix at the new McMaster Innovation Park in
the former Camco appliance plant. The number of nano-investigators will grow
when more than 100 scientists from Canada's national materials technology lab,
now in Ottawa, move to the park.

   "It's a tremendously exciting time and it's also a little bit unsettling,"
says John Preston, director of the Brockhouse Institute for Materials Research
at McMaster. "So many things are happening so quickly that it's very hard to
keep up with what people are doing."

   In truth, the rich promise of nanotechnology has hardly been mined yet. It's
a hopeful but uncertain march into the future.

   For example, having cracked the genomic code -- the sequence of genetic
information that defines human life -- researchers are starting to manipulate
matter at the atomic level and create novel life forms.

   In many ways, nanotechnology seeks to mimic life itself. Scientists look at
how the body's cells use chemical reactions to get energy, how E. coli uses
protein assemblies as whip-like motors to propel it in bodily fluids.

   Researchers study nature's blueprint in order to duplicate it -- to make tiny
machines and program cells to carry out special missions, to produce
nano-packages that can pass through cell membranes to release a medicine or a
toxin to kill cancer cells.

   Some champions believe mankind can outdesign evolution. For them, biology no
longer has to mean destiny.

   The biggest believers have thrown down a gauntlet: Humans can do a better job
at biology than nature has done.

   This hubris is unnerving to other researchers who are very clear about their
responsibilities. Preston, at the Brockhouse institute, says scientists have "to
become more sophisticated in answering (the) question" of how to make safe
nanoproducts. They'll have to do more research on nano's consequences.

   Nano's opponents have long sounded the alarms. The harshest critics have
issued grotesque predictions of unstable arms races, the destruction of jobs and
self-replicating machines that outcompete natural life itself.

   Nay-sayers from Prince Charles to the Christian Right in the U.S. want to put
the brakes on nano research and development. "Discovering the secrets of the
Universe is one thing," Prince Charles said in 2004. "Ensuring that those
secrets are used wisely and appropriately is quite another."

   In Ottawa, the nonprofit Action Group on Erosion, Technology, and
Concentration (ETC) -- the same group that went after genetically modified
organisms a decade ago -- has renewed its call for a global halt to production
of nanoparticles, citing their potential toxicity as a great unknown.

   Yet nano's boosters argue the treasures are simply too great to spurn. Said
Israeli Vice-Premier and Nobel Peace Prize winner Shimon Peres: "Nanotechnology
will make it possible to produce new materials, new dimensions, new engines, new
energies, unknown to the world beforehand."

   Internationally renowned Canadian economist Richard Lipsey thinks
nanotechnology is the latest -- and potentially the most explosive -- of 24
sweeping innovations since history began. His list of mankind's great
technologies includes the domestication of plants, the steam engine and the
computer age.

   Lipsey believes that nanotechnology's sun has not yet risen. "Nanotechnology
... is but a faint glow on the distant horizon. Conceptually, however, this
technology promises the greatest revolution in production since the first stone
tool was produced by flaking chips off flints."

   Putting a stop to death

   Robert A. Freitas Jr. thinks nanotechnology can stop death in its tracks. You
can read about it in his book series, Nanomedicine. Freitas believes
biotechnology and nanotechnology can hold back aging. He sees organic devices,
nano-based pharmaceuticals and genetic therapies as life-extending saviours.

   Freitas calls death an outrage, an unconscionable loss that robs mankind of a
treasury of information since each of us carries "a complex universe of
knowledge, life experience and human relationships" within us.

   The senior research fellow at the Institute for Molecular Manufacturing in
Palo Alto, Calif., has coined the word dechronification for nanomedicine's
wizardry. It means nothing less than rolling back the clock. Dechronification
will arrest biological aging and reduce your biological age by cleaning up and
repairing your body -- a nanotech overhaul of each of your four trillion tissue
cells.

   Freitas foresees the day when nanobots will enter each cell to remove
metabolic toxins and undegradable material. That maintenance check will have to
be done repeatedly since toxins accumulate all the time.

   A second part of the wizardry will involve chromosome-replacement therapy to
correct accumulated damage and mutations cell by cell.

   "How far can we go with this?" Freitas asked in 2002. "Well, if we can
eliminate 99 per cent of all medically preventable conditions that lead to
natural death, your healthy lifespan should increase to about 1,100 years.

   "I hope you'll agree with me that natural death is an outrage. Indeed, it is
humanity's and history's greatest outrage. Now, at long last, maybe we can
finally do something about it. So let's get on with it!"

   What's already happening

   Nanomaterials are with us now -- used in skin products, computers,
stain-resistant fabrics, sports equipment and in medical diagnostic tests.

   - One of the world's most nano-oriented research companies is cosmetics giant
L'Oréal. At L'Oréal factories, high-pressure machinery fires droplets of
material, including zinc-oxide compounds, at the speed of sound to pulverize
them into nanosized bits.

   - At the Coach's Corner sports store in Burlington, owner Camille Kelly
offers a new line of super-durable goalie sticks made by a Finnish company.
Their shafts include carbon nanotubes.

   - Responding to terrorism attacks, the U.S. National Institutes of Health
have backed bioterrorism-related research for years.

   The NIH will invest almost $2 billion US in biodefence research this year,
much of it going to nanotechnology devices aimed at detecting deadly chemicals,
explosives and micro-organisms.

   - Scientists at the National Water Research Institute in Burlington work at
nano scale as they study ways to tackle the contaminated sediments of Randle
Reef in Hamilton Harbour.

   Unstable tiny particles in water play a large role in determining how heavy
metals bind with polymers, bacteria, hydrocarbons and other materials.

   By computer modelling how such particles move and assemble spontaneously,
scientists are better able to identify how best to tackle remediation.

GRAPHIC: Photo: John Rennison, the Hamilton Spectator , Jacek Wojcik and Peter
Mascher at McMaster are trying to make a better light bulb. But the science
behind it may bring humanity closer to playing God.; Photo: SPECIAL TO THE
HAMILTON SPECTATOR , Jacek Wojcik's face is reflected in a window of a
million-dollar machine used at McMaster.

LOAD-DATE: November 17, 2006


                              99 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2006 Sun Media Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved
                             Edmonton Sun (Alberta)

                             October 6, 2006 Friday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 59

LENGTH: 457 words

HEADLINE: Glimmer of hope for blind city tot

BYLINE: BY CP

DATELINE: MONTREAL

BODY:

   Nearly three years after the devastating news that her baby boy was blind,
Nadine Seed is hopeful the veil of darkness could one day be lifted.

   She owes that hope to eight siblings in Valleyfield, Que., whose brush with
the same disease led researchers to the gene that is the most common cause of
blindness among newborns.

   "I thank God that they came forward," the Edmonton mother said in a telephone
interview.

   Researchers at McGill University Health Centre in Montreal and the University
of Nijmegen in the Netherlands were able to identify the gene, CEP290, after
testing the Quebec family, half of whom are blind.

   25% OF PATIENTS

   In subsequent testing, researchers found the mutated gene present in 25% of
patients with the congenital disorder LCA (Leber congenital amaurosis). Each
gene discovery is important because it offers information about how the retina
works and how disease occurs, said Dr. Robert Koenekoop, director of the McGill
Ocular Genetics Centre in Montreal.

   But the discovery of CEP290 is a major step in understanding hereditary
blindness, he said.

   "We can now describe the genetic basis of hereditary blindness in babies in
up to 75% of cases and that's spectacular," said Koenekoop.

   "I would say this is the single most important gene for congenital blindness
just based on numbers, frequency and impact."

   Children with LCA lose their vision because the gene defects cause the cells
in the eye to die or malfunction. They have trouble fixing on objects and their
eyes appear to jiggle in their sockets.

   The disorder affects one in 30,000 newborns. About 10,000 young Canadians and
150,000 people around the world suffer from the hereditary disease.

   Seed's son, Erick, was diagnosed at about four months after her mother
noticed something wrong.

   "I had never had a baby before and thought all new babies had really kind of
roving eyes," she said.

   "All of a sudden our whole world turned upside down and our whole paradigm of
us as parents and us as a family completely shifted."

   But Seed's despair turned to hope after Koenekoop called this year to say her
son had the CEP290 gene.

   GREAT NEWS

   "It was the second best group of news that I could ever hear in my whole life
- the first being that my son could see."

   The discovery last July of the ninth gene responsible for LCA means gene
therapy treatment may be developed that could partially restore vision. The
first human gene replacement therapy trial for vision is slated to take place in
Philadelphia in January on another LCA gene - RPE65.

   If successful, it could lead to a treatment for the million patients around
the world who suffer from juvenile and adult forms of the congenital ailment.

   In animal studies, researchers have found 30% of sight can be restored with
gene therapy.

GRAPHIC: photo by CP Nadine Seed plays with her two-year-old son Erick at the
family's Edmonton home this week.

LOAD-DATE: October 6, 2006


                              103 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2006 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved
                    The Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                            September 1, 2006 Friday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; Pg. G06

LENGTH: 530  words

HEADLINE: Health news

BYLINE: Compiled by Florence Sicoli, Spectator Wire Services

BODY:

   All women urged to take prenatal vitamins

   TORONTO A new Canadian study says all women of childbearing age should be
taking a prenatal multi-vitamin every day.

   The new research shows that getting an adequate intake of vitamins and
minerals by taking a daily prenatal multivitamin sharply cuts the risk of a wide
range of severe birth defects.

   Gideon Koren, director of the Motherisk program at Toronto's Hospital for
Sick Children, says that, based on the study, all women of childbearing age
should be taking a prenatal vitamin supplement daily.

   He explained that's because half of all pregnancies are unplanned and almost
all birth defects develop in the first trimester.

   He stresses they should take specific prenatal multivitamins. These have more
folic acid and iron and less vitamin A, high levels of which can harm the fetus.

   The study is published in yesterday's edition of the Journal Of Obstetrics
And Gynecology Of Canada.

   Kids are getting the message on safety

   TORONTO Fewer kids are being injured, and experts compiling the statistics
think they know why.

   The Canadian Institute for Health Information says head injuries among
children are down by half compared to a decade ago, and that's because kids are
getting the message about playing safely.

   Margaret Keresteci, an official at the institute, says children are also
regularly wearing helmets when they go out on their bikes.

   The number of children hurt in car accidents is also dropping because of the
use of car seats, but researchers say that more work has to be done in this
area.

   Immune cells turned into tumour fighters

   U.S. government scientists turned regular blood cells into tumour attackers
that wiped out all signs of cancer in two men with advanced melanoma.

   The striking finding, unveiled yesterday, marks an important step in the
quest for gene therapy for cancer. But the genetically altered cells didn't help
15 other melanoma victims, so scientists are trying to strengthen the shots.

   Still, the National Cancer Institute called its experiment the first real
success in cancer-gene therapy because it fought cancer's worst stage, when it
has spread through the body, unlike earlier attempts that targeted single
tumours.

   And the U.S. government said it plans to begin testing the gene therapy in
small numbers of patients dying from more common cancers, such as advanced
breast or colon cancer.

   The hope is that one day, such treatment might provide long-lasting tumour
suppression.

   Your lifespan may not match your parents'

   Do you think you'll live as long as your parents did? Recent studies find
genes may not be key in determining longevity.

   Lifespan, says expert James W. Vaupel of Germany, is not like a physical
trait that is strongly inherited.

   "Even identical twins die at different times," said Vaupel, adding that, on
average, they die more than 10 years apart.

   Lifespan is determined by such a complex mix of factors that there is no
accurate way to predict it.

   Some factors include genetic predisposition, disease, nutrition, a woman's
health during pregnancy, subtle injuries and accidents, and simply chance
events, such as a randomly occurring mutation in a gene of a cell that
ultimately leads to cancer.

GRAPHIC: Photo: Kids are getting the message on safety

LOAD-DATE: September 1, 2006


                              106 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2006 Sun Media Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Toronto Sun

                            September 1, 2006 Friday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 289 words

HEADLINE: ALTERED CELLS WIPE OUT CANCER IN 2 PATIENTS

BYLINE: BY AP

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   U.S. scientists turned regular blood cells into tumour attackers that wiped
out all signs of cancer in two men with advanced melanoma, it was reported
yesterday.

   The striking finding marks an important step in the quest for gene therapy
for cancer.

   But the genetically altered cells didn't help 15 other melanoma victims. So
scientists are trying to strengthen the shots.

   'NOT LIKE RADIATION'

   Still, the U.S. National Cancer Institute called its experiment the first
real success in cancer gene therapy because it fought cancer's worst stage, when
it has spread through the body, unlike earlier attempts, which targeted single
tumours.

   And the government hopes to soon begin testing the gene therapy in small
numbers of patients dying from more common cancers, such as advanced breast or
colon cancer.

   The hope is that one day such treatment might provide long-lasting tumour
suppression.

   "It's not like chemotherapy or radiation, where as soon as you're done,
you're done," said lead researcher Dr. Steven Rosenberg.

   "We're giving living cells which continue to grow and function in the body."

   PRAISED BY EXPERTS

   The first two successful patients appear melanoma-free almost two years after
infusions of tumour fighters made from their own blood.

   Doctors can't predict how the men will fare long-term since melanoma, the
most aggressive skin cancer, often returns years later.

   Cancer specialists praised the work, published yesterday by the journal
Science, but warned years of additional research are needed.

   "Clearly this is a first step," said Dr. Len Lichtenfeld of the American
Cancer Society.

   "We have to be very cautious about not raising hopes too much." But, "it is
exciting. It certainly is a proof of concept that this approach will work."

LOAD-DATE: September 1, 2006


                              108 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2006 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved
                    The Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                            August 19, 2006 Saturday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. A07

LENGTH: 559  words

HEADLINE: The herpes-HIV connection; Mac prof leads AIDS conference panel
exploring risk factors

BYLINE: Sharon Boase, The Hamilton Spectator

BODY:

   North Americans infected with the herpes Type 2 virus face a three-fold risk
of contracting HIV, delegates to the International AIDS conference in Toronto
heard this week.

   But people in Africa infected with herpes Type 2 are at 10 times the risk of
contracting HIV. As many as 70 per cent of people in parts of Africa are
infected with the herpes virus.

   A gathering of scientists led by a McMaster University researcher heard that
a herpes infection increases the number of HIV-susceptible target cells in the
genital tract.

   "It's been known for a long time that herpes is a risk factor for HIV, but I
think now we're getting a little better handle on why and how it's a risk
factor," said McMaster's Dr. Ken Rosenthal, who chaired Wednesday's session
along with Dr. Mario Clerici, of Italy.

   University of Toronto researcher Dr. Rupert Kaul's data on the link between
herpes and HIV was one of several "exciting advances" in the area of mucous
immunity, Rosenthal said.

   Rosenthal, head of the viral vaccines division of the Centre for Gene
Therapeutics at the Michael DeGroote School of Medicine, is part of a global
group mining the possibilities for immunity protection in the mucous membranes
-- the moist tissue lining the lungs, digestive system and genital tract. Their
work represents important steps on the long road to developing an HIV vaccine.

   Researchers like Rosenthal have turned their attention to innate and mucosal
immunity as a possible breakthrough in the fight against AIDS.

   Different from the immunities we acquire over a lifetime, innate immunities
are primitive, Rosenthal said. Humans actually share them with fruit flies,
earthworms and even plants.

   "It turns out, the vast majority of our immune cells are located in the
mucous membranes of our bodies, because that's where most of the pathogens, or
infectious agents, enter," he said.

   Recently, researchers discovered that no matter how HIV enters the body -
whether through sexual transmission or injection drug use - the virus rapidly
targets and quickly destroys the mucosal immune system.

   "More than anything, this reinforces the argument that we've got to have a
much better understanding of mucosal immunity and how it works, because this is
the target tissue that we have to protect," Rosenthal said.

   Researchers at McMaster and at the University of Manitoba shared data on
African sex trade workers who, although exposed to HIV, have not contracted it.
The HIV-resistant women seem to have different innate immune responses than the
sex-trade workers who became infected.

   Another presentation included research on green monkeys in which the simian
version of HIV, called SIV, is found yet doesn't lead to AIDS. When SIV is
transferred to a different species, in this case a Rhesus Macaque, those monkeys
develop an AIDS-like illness and die within a year.

   The researchers found a difference in the behaviour of regulatory T-cells
(which suppress immune response) in the two groups of monkeys.

   "These are worth pursuing and understanding better," Rosenthal said.

   "It's clear there's growing attention being paid by researchers to mucosal
immunity and innate immunity. From my perspective, these are some of the
research frontiers at the basic science level that are going to really lead the
charge, if you will, to some new understanding of the disease."

   sboase@thespec.com 905-526-2452

LOAD-DATE: August 19, 2006


                              109 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2006 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved
                    The Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                            August 15, 2006 Tuesday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 541  words

HEADLINE: Hamilton presence strong at AIDS event

BYLINE: Sharon Boase, The Hamilton Spectator

BODY:

   Hamilton residents living with HIV/AIDS are touching the hearts and minds of
thousands from around the globe gathered in Toronto for the 16th International
AIDS Conference.

   Artwork by some two dozen Steeltown people with HIV/AIDS is being featured in
an exhibit called Visual AIDS at the conference. The collages, made with images
from magazines, have created a stir among the 24,000 delegates.

   "Statistics mean very little to people, they're just numbers," said Betty
Anne Thomas, executive director of the AIDS Network, based in downtown Hamilton.
"It's really about heart and soul, it's about pain and caring and love and
compassion."

   The pieces came out of a creative therapy group the AIDS Network runs.
Although they're not supposed to, conference delegates are snapping pictures and
asking for the stories behind the works.

   She and other AIDS Network staffers are in Toronto to update their
information and swap strategy with others working in the field. Twenty-five
years after the disease came to light -- and 25 million deaths later -- the
stigma around HIV/AIDS remains one of the biggest challenges, Thomas said.

   Aboriginals, young people and newcomers to Canada (especially those from
Africa and the Caribbean) are foremost on the minds of network staffers, Thomas
said. While public education campaigns in parts of Africa and the Caribbean make
it clear that HIV/AIDS is epidemic, it hasn't got near the same profile in
Canada and so newcomers and young people don't consider it a serious threat, she
said.

   McMaster University researcher Dr. Ken Rosenthal will chair a session at the
conference tomorrow where researchers from around the world will compare notes
on their work that could lead to an HIV vaccine.

   Rosenthal, head of the viral vaccines division of the Centre for Gene
Therapeutics at the Michael DeGroote School of Medicine, is part of a group of
researchers probing the potential for immune protection in the mucous membranes
-- the moist tissue lining the lungs, digestive system and genital tract.

   Among his areas of research is a group of African sex-trade workers who,
despite exposure to the virus, have not contracted it. Researchers have turned
their attention to what they call innate mucosal immunity as a possible
breakthrough in the fight against AIDS.

   "The session I chair will deal with some new advances in that area,"
Rosenthal said yesterday. "We're beginning to appreciate that it may be the
innate system that is very important in protection."

   Earlier this year, Rosenthal was awarded about $120,000 annually for five
years by the philanthropic organization run by Bill and Melinda Gates. That
grant was part of some $287 million the Gates foundation handed out to create an
international network dedicated to finding a vaccine to prevent HIV/AIDS.

   Rosenthal said he went to the Gates foundation because the federal government
doesn't allot enough money for AIDS research.

   The Toronto conference, which runs all this week, is a chance for researchers
to compare notes and strategies and to make sure their work is well
co-ordinated, Rosenthal said.

   "Hopefully, some of the information that comes out of it will translate into
policy changes by government and funding bodies," he added.

   sboase@thespec.com 905-526-2452

LOAD-DATE: August 15, 2006


                              110 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2006 Sun Media Corporation
                                The Toronto Sun

                             August 7, 2006 Monday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Sex & Money; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 581 words

HEADLINE: THE PETER PRINCIPLE;
VAL SAYS MEDICAL COMMUNITY'S CONCERN IS ON THE RISE ... WHILE LINDA SAYS YOU GET
MORE BANG FOR YOUR BUCK

BYLINE: BY VALERIE GIBSON

BODY:

   Here's the word that strikes real terror into every man's heart, and deflates
more than his ego.

   Impotence.

   Or erectile dysfunction, as it's known nowadays.

   It's the Darth Vader of men's sexuality and probably the most feared word in
a modern male's vocabulary.

   Despite intensive focus over the past few years, and the introduction of
Viagra, Levitra and Cialis (what I call Lazarus drugs, because they raise the
supposedly dead), impotence is still a word few men will ever let pass their
lips. Especially when it comes to their own sexual performance.

   Despite the contention according to medical studies that 50% of men have
difficulty maintaining an erection at some time in their lives, few men will
admit it.

   It's true that Playboy's Hugh Hefner has become the poster boy for admitting
publicly he takes Viagra. But, notably, he never ever says he needs to. Hey, who
can blame him for basking in the amazement and envy he gets at 80 years old,
stating he regularly services several young beauties. Maybe he takes it
intravenously.

   But for the average guy, having erection problems often causes him such deep
emotional trauma, despair and insecurity, he's terrified of anyone knowing.

   Even his own partner.

   That is a tragedy -- not just for him but his partner as well, as refusing to
acknowledge impotence can cause irreparable harm to an intimate relationship.

   In the case of a wife, it's often the case that she blames herself, feels
rejected, guilty or betrayed as she can't figure out why sex has stopped. But,
hey, if your guy can't perform in bed, don't get mad -- get him a doctor!

   Especially as it's now known that hiding such a major problem can be
physically very dangerous.

   It's always been known ED can be a link to other serious health issues such
as diabetes, but the newest studies from the American Urology Association show
it can be an early warning signal for upcoming cardiovascular disease, even if
there are no symptoms yet.

   "If a man is experiencing ED, he should definitely have his cardiovasular
risk factors investigated," says Dr. Miguel Llano, a physician at the Canadian
Men's Clinic, specializing in erectile difficulties.

   Although there are a number of different medical treatments at the moment for
ED -- including the pill trio (Viagra etc.) vacuum devices, surgical treatment
and personal injection therapy (despite the wince-making thoughts, one of the
most successful of all the treatments) -- Dr. Llano states that the future
(maybe 2011) will involve gene therapy.

   Spearheaded by the Albert Einstein College of Medicine, New York, gene
therapy is a genetic and cell-based technology that acts very differently from
the drugs in Viagra, Cialis and Levitra.

   Dr. Llano explains: "Gene therapy relaxes the smooth muscle cells by blocking
the calcium. Without calcium ions present, smooth muscle cells relax and the
tissue will then also relax. This allows blood to flow in and produce an
erection."

   So, paradoxically, a penis has to relax internally in order to stiffen up
with blood flow.

   But while the focus has been intense in recent years on male impotence,
solutions to the growing problem of female sexual dysfunction, while not totally
disregarded, have been less successful.

   After their attempts to create a Viagra pill for women failed, Pfizer
basically said that, since satisfactory sex for women is obviously more "in the
head" than "in the parts," a pill wasn't the answer.

   Of course not. Women need love and romance.

   That, and lots and lots of good foreplay.

LOAD-DATE: August 8, 2006


                              111 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2006 Sun Media Corporation
                                The Toronto Sun

                              July 21, 2006 Friday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; U.S. Sunflashes; Pg. 32

LENGTH: 36 words

HEADLINE: CONVICTED OF MOLESTATION

BYLINE: BY SUN WIRE SERVICES

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES

BODY:

   William French Anderson, a world-renowned geneticist who was once a runner-up
for Time magazine's Man of the Year for his role in developing gene therapy, has
been convicted of molesting the young daughter of a colleague.

LOAD-DATE: July 21, 2006


                              117 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2006 Sun Media Corporation
                                The Toronto Sun

                             May 31, 2006 Wednesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 1231 words

HEADLINE: LOYALIST LEADS THE WAY IN BIOSCIENCES;
ROBUST SECTOR EXPERIENCED $3.6 BILLION IN REVENUES IN 2001 -- AN INCREASE OF
339% SINCE 1997

BYLINE: BY SHARON ASCHAIEK, SPECIAL TO THE TORONTO SUN

BODY:

   Canada is a global leader in biotechnology, and Loyalist College is ensuring
its graduates are well prepared to enjoy the burgeoning employment
opportunities.

   The school's cluster of comprehensive and innovative bioscience programs arms
students with extensive theoretical knowledge, practical experience and a
network of contacts in their field.

   Upon graduation, they'll be prepared to join a robust sector that experienced
$3.6 billion in revenues in 2001 -- an increase of 339% since 1997.

   "The bioscience group at Loyalist College has worked diligently to provide
curricula that meet the changing face of the technology workforce," says Eric
Bauer, a microbiologist and teacher in the program.

   The college's school of applied science offers four core bioscience programs:
Biotechnology Technician/Technology, Bio-Food Technician/Technology,
Environmental Technician/ Technology and Chemical Engineering Technician/
Technology.

   In each program, students may pursue either a two-year technician diploma or
a three-year technologist advanced diploma. They may also take advantage of
overlapping areas of study among the programs by pursuing a double diploma.

   Developed in conjunction with members of industry, the programs immerse
students in up-to-date knowledge and train them in the wide range of skills
they'll need in the work world.

   The Biotechnology Technician/Technology program, for example, educates
students about how the processes of living organisms can be applied to areas
such as gene therapy, individually tailored medicines, environmental
decontamination and genetic engineering of crops and livestock. Students put
this knowledge to use in sophisticated labs using high-end equipment such as PCR
and DNA sequencers.

   The Chemical Engineering Technician/Technology program, meanwhile, features a
specialized curriculum in chromatography, spectroscopy, radiochemistry, food
chemistry and manufacturing practices. Working in a state-of-the-art chemical
instrumentation lab and engaging in both teamwork and independent research,
students develop practical skills in areas such as computer applications, health
and safety and microbiology.

   The only program in Ontario in the growing field of nutraceuticals and
functional foods, the Bio-Food Technician/Technology program covers the
biochemical properties of plants, and the ways to use them to improve nutrition
and health.

   Working in a supercritical CO2 extraction lab, a cutting-edge facility unique
to Loyalist, students isolate and extract biological materials without the use
of toxic solvents.

   "EXCELLENT LABS, FACILITIES"

   Finally, in the Environmental Technician/Technology program, students sample
and analyse environ- mental contaminants, and learn about the underlying social
systems that contribute to soil, air and water pollution.

   "Loyalist College has excellent laboratory and field study facilities. The
programs are contemporary and the staff is highly qualified," Bauer says. "The
teacher-to-learner ratio is excellent, especially so in the laboratory and field
components where individualized instruction and feedback are vital."

   It's an assessment with which Lisa Prior, a graduate of the Chemical
Engineering Technology program, wholeheartedly agrees. In 1989, after her
original plan to work in hospitality management proved less lucrative than she'd
anticipated, Prior, a high school chemistry buff, began investigating Loyalist's
offerings and decided to give chemical engineering a shot.

   What she discovered was an intensely practical curriculum and knowledgeable,
helpful teachers who brought the course content to life.

   "The program was amazingly hands-on. We learned a concept and then applied it
in the lab in the same semester. We took equipment apart and put it back
together again, just so that we could understand how it worked," she says. "The
teachers I had were fantastic. They made learning fun. When something went
wrong, as it often does in the lab, they were right there to help you work
through it."

   WORK PLACEMENTS

   Like all bioscience students, Prior participated in work placements,
including one in the pet food division at Quaker Oats, where she extracted
vitamins from soft dog food. She graduated from the program with excellent
troubleshooting, analytical, organizational and computer skills, and had little
difficulty finding good work in her field.

   Today, she's a lab manager at the Royal Military College of Canada (RMC),
where her day-to-day responsibilities include overseeing staffing, recruiting
volunteers, shipping and receiving equipment, analysing lab samples and managing
financial accounts. She has led cutting-edge projects such as testing chemical
protection gear and gas masks for military personnel, which involved travelling
to several military bases in Canada.

   "It is nice to know that what we do plays a role in protecting the safety of
the troops," Prior says.

   Prior is one of about 12,000 employees driving the phenomenal growth of
Canada's biotechnology industry. According to Statistics Canada's 2001
Biotechnology Use and Development Survey, biotech generated $746 million in
exports that year, experienced $1.3 billion in research and development spending
and enjoyed $513 million in government investment from 2001 to 2002.

   Canada's approximately 375 biotech companies -- the largest per capita number
in the world -- are especially making an impact in areas such as human health,
agriculture, food processing and the environment. In the area of human health
alone, biotech has generated hundreds of useful products related to the
treatment of cancer, central nervous system disorders, infectious diseases and
cardiovascular disease.

   All of this activity has contributed to an approximately 7% annual growth
rate in biotech employment, and Loyalist grads are among the most prepared to
launch fruitful careers.

   Ron Carter is very familiar with the high calibre of the school's bioscience
grads: he's hired about a dozen of them since 1990 to work at his environmental
engineering company.

   "I have a group of excellent graduates now, and they're really committed to
the environmental field," says Carter, president of Belleville, Ont.-based
Quinte Eco Consultants, which performs environmental site assessments for
industrial and municipal clients.

   Carter serves on the college's bioscience advisory board, along with other
industry professionals, including chemical engineers, plant managers, food
industry executives and representatives from companies such as PepsiCo and Alcan
Inc.

   "I've been involved on the board for a number of years, and the programs are
constantly being fine-tuned to meet the demands of industry," he says.

   One recent graduate who's benefited from the up-to-date status of the
bioscience programs is Terry Teertstra, who completed a double diploma in
Biotechnology and Bio-Food Technology this past spring. Her job search had
barely begun before she was offered a position with the Department of National
Defence in Kingston, Ont., in research and development.

   "The Loyalist courses were very in-depth ... The teachers and staff are
really amazing and their level of knowledge is extraordinary," Teertstra says.
"Combine that with the amount of diverse equipment and instruments, and I truly
believe that you come away with more experience than you would elsewhere. The
program and professors more than adequately prepare you to find work in the
field."

NOTES:  Career Connection

GRAPHIC: 2 photos courtesy Loyalist College

LOAD-DATE: May 31, 2006


                              118 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2006 Sun Media Corporation
                             Edmonton Sun (Alberta)

                              May 23, 2006 Tuesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 34

LENGTH: 335 words

HEADLINE: FIND MAY HELP BLIND CHILDREN

BYLINE: BY CP

DATELINE: TORONTO

BODY:

   It's one of those questions that has baffled humans for ages: What came
first, the chicken or the egg? For scientists seeking a way to give sight to
genetically blind chickens, it was definitely the egg.

   Researchers from the University of Florida in Gainesville injected healthy
genes through the eggshells of chickens with an inherited disorder that causes
them to be born blind. When the treated chicks hatched, not only could they see,
but their vision was "amazing," said neuroscientist Sue Semple-Rowland, the
principal researcher.

   More importantly, the gene transfer raises high hopes for developing a
treatment to restore sight in children with a similar condition, called Leber
congenital amaurosis Type 1, or LCA1.

   "I firmly believe this will work," Semple-Rowland said from Gainesville.

   "We're really, really close to making it possible to treat kids with various
forms of LCA(1) with gene therapy and have them have a relatively normal life in
terms of vision."

   While there is much work still to be done, she predicted a treatment for
humans could come within just a few years.

   The breakthrough with the chickens took 20 years of painstaking work by
Semple-Rowland and her colleagues to determine what caused the birds' blindness,
to isolate the defective gene and then to figure out how to fix it.

   Her lab modified a virus to carry a normal copy of the gene that is defective
in the chickens, a type of Rhode Island Red. After boring tiny holes in the
shells of fertilized eggs, they injected a small quantity of the virus into the
neural tubes of two-day-old embryos, closed up the holes with a waxed substance
and waited for them to hatch almost three weeks later.

   Of seven chicks injected in-utero, six could see after hatching, said the
scientists, whose research is published online in the journal Public Library of
Science-Medicine.

   "The blind animals just stand there, obviously," Semple-Rowland said. "These
animals' performance visually was spectacular. Their ability to peck targets was
amazing to me."

GRAPHIC: photo from Sun files Sue Semple-Rowland and her colleagues at the
University of Florida in Gainesville have developed a process that stops most
chickens with a hereditary disorder from being born blind.

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 2006


                              122 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2006 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved
                    The Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                              May 15, 2006 Monday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. A05

LENGTH: 354  words

HEADLINE: Cancer society bets on Mac researcher; Dr. Brian Lichty hopes to make
a vaccine out of a virus that kills cancer

BYLINE: Joanna Frketich, The Hamilton Spectator

BODY:

   Cancer may one day be cured by simply going to the doctor's office and
getting a vaccine created by a McMaster researcher.

   It's a hope the Canadian Cancer Society is willing to bet on, giving a
$320,000 grant to a researcher trying to make a vaccine out of a virus that
kills cancer.

   Dr. Brian Lichty was the only Hamilton researcher to receive a grant this
year from the National Cancer Institute of Canada, which selects research to be
funded by the society.

   The competition for $47.3 million given out across Canada was fierce, with
only one in four proposals receiving funding.

   "We want to fund the best research," said Stuart Edmonds, director of
research for the institute. "The area of research he's working on is a very
promising area."

   Lichty was part of a team led by renowned Ottawa researcher Dr. John Bell
that discovered in 2000 that a North American virus spread to farm animals by
insects could kill cancer without harming healthy cells.

   Lichty left Ottawa a year and a half ago to come to McMaster to start his own
research on turning the vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) into a vaccine that
could treat and possibly even cure cancer.

   "We know right now it will kill the tumour," he said. "I think we can improve
it by making the virus alert the immune system to the presence of the tumour.
The thinking is now that our bodies ignore the tumour because the tumour flies
under the radar. We have to wake it up and stimulate it to alert it."

   Alerting the immune system would mean the virus would have help attacking the
cancer cells because viruses are often not strong enough to kill large numbers
of cancer cells in patients. It would also mean the cancer would forever be on
the immune system's radar screen.

   "It's a lifelong cure," said Lichty.

   The three-year grant confirms McMaster's Centre for Gene Therapeutics as a
leader in using viruses to treat and cure diseases. Lichty also hopes it will
help McMaster join a consortium, led by Bell, of Canadian universities using a
variety of viruses to try to create a cancer vaccine.

   "It will be whichever virus wins the race," said Lichty.

   jfrketich@thespec.com

   905-526-3349

LOAD-DATE: May 15, 2006


                              123 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2006 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved
                    The Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                              May 15, 2006 Monday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. A05

LENGTH: 354  words

HEADLINE: Cancer society bets on Mac researcher; Dr. Brian Lichty hopes to make
a vaccine out of a virus that kills cancer

BYLINE: Joanna Frketich, The Hamilton Spectator

BODY:

   Cancer may one day be cured by simply going to the doctor's office and
getting a vaccine created by a McMaster researcher.

   It's a hope the Canadian Cancer Society is willing to bet on, giving a
$320,000 grant to a researcher trying to make a vaccine out of a virus that
kills cancer.

   Dr. Brian Lichty was the only Hamilton researcher to receive a grant this
year from the National Cancer Institute of Canada, which selects research to be
funded by the society.

   The competition for $47.3 million given out across Canada was fierce, with
only one in four proposals receiving funding.

   "We want to fund the best research," said Stuart Edmonds, director of
research for the institute. "The area of research he's working on is a very
promising area."

   Lichty was part of a team led by renowned Ottawa researcher Dr. John Bell
that discovered in 2000 that a North American virus spread to farm animals by
insects could kill cancer without harming healthy cells.

   Lichty left Ottawa a year and a half ago to come to McMaster to start his own
research on turning the vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) into a vaccine that
could treat and possibly even cure cancer.

   "We know right now it will kill the tumour," he said. "I think we can improve
it by making the virus alert the immune system to the presence of the tumour.
The thinking is now that our bodies ignore the tumour because the tumour flies
under the radar. We have to wake it up and stimulate it to alert it."

   Alerting the immune system would mean the virus would have help attacking the
cancer cells because viruses are often not strong enough to kill large numbers
of cancer cells in patients. It would also mean the cancer would forever be on
the immune system's radar screen.

   "It's a lifelong cure," said Lichty.

   The three-year grant confirms McMaster's Centre for Gene Therapeutics as a
leader in using viruses to treat and cure diseases. Lichty also hopes it will
help McMaster join a consortium, led by Bell, of Canadian universities using a
variety of viruses to try to create a cancer vaccine.

   "It will be whichever virus wins the race," said Lichty.

   jfrketich@thespec.com

   905-526-3349

LOAD-DATE: May 15, 2006


                              125 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2006 Sun Media Corporation
                                The Toronto Sun

                            April 29, 2006 Saturday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 358 words

HEADLINE: BABY'S LIFE IN HANDS OF ITALIAN DOCS;
BOY HAS RARE BOY-IN-BUBBLE DISEASE

BYLINE: BY KEVIN CONNOR, TORONTO SUN

BODY:

   It breaks Kevin and Tracy DesLauriers' heart that they can no longer hold
their newborn without gloves and that he can only see their eyes behind a mask.

   Fifteen-week-old Parker has Severe Combined Immunodeficiency Disease (SCID),
a rare immune deficiency more commonly known as the boy-in-the-bubble disease.

   "I saw the boy-in-the-bubble episode on Seinfeld and I thought it was a joke.
It was tough when we were told our son had no immune system," said Kevin, 34, a
high school teacher in North York.

   SCID is actually a group of inherited disorders characterized by a lack of
immune response.

   It occurs when a child lacks lymphocytes, the specialized white blood cells
the body uses to fight infection.

   When a child's immune system isn't functioning properly, it can be impossible
to fight off viruses, bacteria and fungi that cause infections.

   Children with untreated SCID rarely live to age two.

   Parker, the DesLauriers' first child, has the worst form of the disease and
he is also missing the enzymes that remove toxins from the body.

   Tracy said the hardest part is that Parker is in an isolation room at The
Hospital for Sick Children and that the couple has to be covered in medical
gowns from head to toe.

   "Since he was 6 weeks old we have had no skin-to-skin contact. The only thing
he can see is our eyes, but he knows who we are," said Tracy, 31, who teaches
Grade 1 in North York.

   Parker's form of SCID can't be treated by the normal method of a bone marrow
transplant, but he has been accepted into a small clinical trial in Italy where
doctors are experimenting with gene therapy.

   In October, the two will quit their jobs and move to Italy for six months so
Parker can take part in the trial.

   "It's going to be stressful. We are quitting our jobs and will have no income
which will be huge. We'll be living in Italy and still have to pay our bills and
our mortgage (on their Ajax home)," Kevin said.

   Tracy's bother, Michael Kulas, a member of the British rock band James, has
scheduled an evening of entertainment at the Rivoli, 334 Queen St. W., on June
16 to raise awareness and support for Parker.

   For more information go to scidada.blogspot.com.

GRAPHIC: 1. photo by Michael Peake Kevin and Tracy DesLauriers' 15-week-old son
has a rare disease and will be taken to Italy as part of a clinical trial. 2.
photo of PARKER DESLAURIERS 15 weeks old 3. photo of MICHAEL KULAS Rock support

LOAD-DATE: April 29, 2006


                              129 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2006 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved
                    The Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                           February 4, 2006 Saturday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. SP07

LENGTH: 677  words

HEADLINE: Gene doping the next wave

BYLINE: John Kernaghan, The Hamilton Spectator

BODY:

   The next frontier in sports doping is at hand with fears that gene-therapy
science is being used to improve athletes' endurance.

   And while Olympic anti-doping czar Dick Pound agrees gene doping is the next
step for cheats, he believes his policing body is on top of the science to
detect it.

   Gene doping, which is banned in sports, involves transferring genes directly
into human cells to blend into an athlete's DNA to enhance muscle growth and
increase strength or endurance.

   "We've known about it for some time and in December held a symposium about it
with some of the best experts in the field," Pound said. "We feel we're at the
crest of the wave on this."

   While he couldn't put much credence in revelations from the trial of a German
track coach accused of supplying performance-enhancing drugs, he said the World
Anti-Doping Agency (WADA) believes it will not be difficult to test for gene
doping.

   Dr. Jonathan Bramson of the Centre for Gene Therapeutics at McMaster
University's Health Sciences Centre agreed.

   He said a muscle biopsy and DNA screening should be able to detect if
artificial means were used to promote muscle growth and endurance.

   The trial of Thomas Springstein has uncovered evidence indicating that gene
doping may already be a reality in sports.

   E-mails seized in the investigation of the track coach contained references
to Repoxygen, a substance now in clinical trials for gene therapy.

   Springstein, 47, has worked with some of Germany's top runners. He is on
trial in the eastern German city of Magdeburg on charges including the alleged
doping of young athletes in 2003.

   The trial took an unexpected twist this week when the court was read e-mails
found when police raided Springstein's home in search of evidence. In one
e-mail, Springstein complained that the "new Repoxygen is hard to get. Please
give me new instructions soon so that I can order the product before Christmas."

   Repoxygen is designed for gene therapy on patients with anemia. It can boost
an athlete's performance by inducing the release of erythropoietin, or EPO, a
substance that stimulates the production of red blood cells to carry more oxygen
to the muscles.

   WADA already tests for synthetic EPO. But there is no known test yet for
Repoxygen, which gives the body the gene to stimulate EPO production on its own.

   There have been fears gene doping could be a threat by the time of the 2008
Beijing Olympics, but the e-mails suggest it is closer than that.

   Werner Franke, a German scientist who has documented doping cases in the
former East Germany, told The Associated Press that Springstein's e-mail
exchanges about Repoxygen and other substances suggested criminal activity.

   "This is about arranged bodily harm. This is worse than in the GDR and more
brutal than the BALCO scandal," Franke said in the Frankfurter Allgemeine
Zeitung.

   The founder of the U.S. BALCO lab was jailed last year for orchestrating an
illegal steroids distribution scheme among elite athletes.

   The German Athletics Association is urging the government to make genetic
doping illegal, saying only police and prosecutors can tackle the problem.

   Springstein has worked with athletes including former east German track stars
Grit Breuer and Katrin Krabbe. The two were banned from competition for using
the steroid clenbuterol in 1992.

   The IOC plans to conduct 1,200 doping tests at this month's Winter Olympics
in Turin, Italy. The testing period began with the opening of the athletes'
villages Wednesday. The Games themselves open Feb. 10.

   Using performance-enhancing drugs in Italy is a crime, but a compromise for
the period of the Olympics will spare any athletes testing positive from
prosecution.

   jkernaghan@thespec.com 905-526-3422

   With files from The Associated Press

   EPO Profile

   Erythropoietin (EPO) is a protein hormone produced by the kidney.

   After being released into the blood stream it binds with receptors in the
bone marrow, where it stimulates the production of red blood cells.

   EPO was previously introduced by blood transfusion but is now produced
synthetically and delivered by syringe.

LOAD-DATE: February 4, 2006


                              131 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2006 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved
                    The Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                            January 20, 2006 Friday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. A03

LENGTH: 509  words

HEADLINE: Travis's only chance; Parents fight to get promised treatment for
their ailing son

BYLINE: John Burman, The Hamilton Spectator

BODY:

   Jenny and Derek Carter are preparing to fight what could be the decisive
battle for their son's life.

   The Hamilton couple has been fighting Batten's disease, the rare degenerative
condition their son Travis, 8, has suffered for three years. They have struggled
to raise money for groundbreaking gene therapy treatment they believe is their
boy's only hope of survival.

   Now they are getting ready to fight Weill Medical College at Cornell
University where they were promised Travis would be treated as part of a
groundbreaking gene therapy research project. The Carters and other families
have worked for two years to raise $300,000 for the research and were devastated
to be told in November Travis would not be included after all.

   They are convinced this is Travis's only chance.

   The Carters are now interviewing New York law firms with an eye to selecting
a legal team to launch a lawsuit against Cornell. They are waiting to hear if
there has been any change in the college's position since meeting with the
medical team Jan. 11.

   "We are hoping not to go that route, but it is our final option unless they
come up with a new plan for Travis," Derek said yesterday.

   "We will give it a week or so."

   The Carters were told in November the neurosurgical team at Cornell had
decided it was too risky for Travis to undergo the procedure. The family does
not accept this, noting the team had assured them over the past two years he
could be included.

   After Travis's supporters deluged Cornell with e-mails and phone calls, the
family got a Jan. 11 meeting in New York with the dean of medicine Antonio
Gotto.

   But the medical team would not change its stand about the risk for Travis

   Heartbroken, they returned to Hamilton and decided to fight.

   The medical college has told The Spectator it does not discuss individual
cases.

   "We still want what they promised to give us, treatment for Travis," Jenny
said yesterday.

   "Anything short of that will not cut it."

   The Vista Court couple has organized a petition to go to Ontario Health
Minister George Smitherman urging him to intercede with Cornell. Smitherman was
to get the petition this week.

   Derek Carter said the family spearheaded fundraising drives to support the
research project because they believed and were assured Travis would be part of
the group of children on the list for treatment.

   The money they raised has all gone into funding the hugely expensive
research, with nothing to show for Travis.

   The surgery itself, which involves drilling holes into the brain to deliver
the genes to produce the enzyme that breaks down harmful fats in Batten's
children, costs more than $100,000.

   The cost of surgery and follow-up care for Travis and nine other children on
the Cornell list would be about $4.1 million.

   Travis was diagnosed in October 2002. At the time doctors told his parents to
get a camera and take nice pictures of him because that's all they could do for
him.

   For more information about Batten's disease or to contact the Carters, see
www.travisbattle.com or call 1-800-546-7682.

   jburman@thespec.com

   905-526-2469

GRAPHIC: Photo: Tory Zimmerman, the Hamilton Spectator , Derek Carter with son
Travis, 8, who suffers from a rare degenerative condition, is suing U.S. medical
college after it said Travis would not be included in its gene therapy research
project.

LOAD-DATE: January 20, 2006


                              132 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2006 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved
                    The Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                           January 4, 2006 Wednesday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. A07

LENGTH: 595  words

HEADLINE: The Carter family won't give up; Meeting set in New York as part of
effort to get treatment Catching up with...

BYLINE: Christine Cox, The Hamilton Spectator

BODY:

   Travis Carter. Here's an update on a story that ran Nov. 16, 2005. The
headline: Fighting for Travis. U.S. hospital stuns Hamilton family by denying
experimental surgery.

   Derek and Jenny Carter of Hamiltonare fighting to obtain life-saving
treatment for their son from a New York hospital and want Ontario Health
Minister George Smitherman to take up their cause.

   Travis Carter, who turns eight on Jan. 12, has a rare degenerative condition
called Batten's disease. He's in a wheelchair, has almost no speech and very
little vision. He was on a New York hospital's list for groundbreaking gene
therapy that his parents believe is his only hope of survival. With the
community's help, the Carters raised more than $300,000 for the research study
at the Weill Medical College, Cornell University.

   But November brought a devastating blow. The neurosurgical team decided that
it was too high risk for Travis to undergo the gene transfer procedure. A doctor
told the Carters there was no evidence the unproven treatment would help their
son.

   Since then, they have urged the public to e-mail or phone the doctors, asking
them to change their mind. The couple has not ruled out legal action aimed at
forcing the hospital to treat Travis.

   They've also started a petition to present to Smitherman later this month.
They anticipate getting about 5,000 signatures.

   Carter hopes Smitherman will advocate for the family by asking Cornell to
reconsider. If Cornell won't reconsider, he wants Smitherman to ask the
hospital, "to be compassionate enough to at least release the serum," that could
help Travis by stopping the progression of the disease.

   Carter is confident the surgery itself -- which involves drilling holes into
the brain --could be carried out at the Hospital for Sick Children in Toronto.

   He is overwhelmed by the support he's received from the community.

   "People say they've been following Travis's battle and continue to pray for
him."

   Carter said the dean of medicine, Antonio Gotto, has offered to meet with him
and his wife on Jan. 11 in New York. The head of the research team will be
there, too.

   Carter wants, "direct answers" about why the doctors changed their mind. He
will try one more time to convince them to go ahead.

   The medical college told The Spectator it would be inappropriate to discuss
specifics of an individual case.

   "We carefully evaluate the safety of enrolling each human subject in research
protocols," the statement said.

   "As physicians and researchers, we are committed to helping those who seek
our expertise with the utmost compassion and attention, but we must always
exercise that commitment while adhering to rigorous medical and ethical
criteria, including a prospective assessment of whether it is safe to proceed."

   Jeff Zwolak, a religious studies teacher at Cardinal Newman Catholic
Secondary School, is the family's latest ally in trying to get the decision
reversed. When school resumes Jan. 9, Zwolak will encourage students to use the
computer labs on their lunch hours and e-mail the hospital, urging treatment for
Travis.

   Zwolak said he tries to make his students, "socially conscious." He hopes
hundreds of students will send e-mails the week of Jan. 9 and that other schools
will pick up the idea.

   "This story particularly gets me," Zwolak said.

   "They're not even asking for a penny, just to show support for Travis."

   Zwolak said the community embraced his family when his brother, Matt, had an
accident in 1999 that left him a quadriplegic.

   To contact the Carters, see www.travisbattle.com or call 1-800-546-7682.

   ccox@thespec.com

   905-526-3323

GRAPHIC: Photo: Hamilton Spectator File Photo , Derek Carter, here with son
Travis, hopes Ontario Health Minister George Smitherman will intervene on the
family's behalf in urging a New York medical centre to perform gene transfer
therapy.

LOAD-DATE: January 4, 2006


                              136 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2005 Sun Media Corporation
                             Edmonton Sun (Alberta)

                            December 4, 2005 Sunday
                                 EARLY EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. SP17

LENGTH: 409 words

HEADLINE: IT'S A NEW GENERATION OF CHEATERS

BYLINE: BY AP

DATELINE: STOCKHOLM, Sweden

BODY:

   Anti-doping officials and scientists are meeting again to prepare for what is
likely to be the next generation of cheats in sports - gene dopers.

   While nobody knows if gene doping exists, World Anti-Doping Agency (WADA)
chairman Dick Pound of Montreal said he could not rule out the possibility.

   "Anything is possible. We don't believe it does but you can't exclude it,"
Pound said Saturday night on the eve of the two-day 2nd WADA Symposium on Gene
Doping.

   "We don't have any tests that everybody in the scientific community approved,
to say 'yes, if we find x, y and z, that means genetic doping has occurred.'
That's one of the purposes of the update at this symposium. Where are we in the
development of the kind of test that will identify this?"

   HUMAN CELLS

   Gene doping involves transferring genes directly into human cells to blend
into an athlete's own DNA to enhance muscle growth and increase strength or
endurance.

   Unlike steroids or drugs, the added genes are not detectable yet.

   "There are some experiments that one of the scientists who is here in
Stockholm has done," Pound said. "Playing with the genes, he has increased
muscle bulk in laboratory animals by 15 per cent with no exercise, nothing."

   If you are trying to throw a shot put 20 metres or 40 metres, that would be a
great interest to you.

   "That's the kind of thing we have to anticipate," Pound said. "Anything that
might assist the body to use the oxygen better, might increase endurance."

   "So we have to be alert to that, meet with these scientists, find out what
they're doing, figure out whether some of those applications might be
interesting for people who want to cheat in sport and then work on devising
tests."

   LEADING SCIENTISTS

   Some 50 leading scientists in the field of gene technology and gene therapy
from around the world will attend the conference at Karolinska Institutet, one
of Europe's largest medical universities.

   Professor Arne Ljungqvist, a former second-in-command at Karolinska
Institutet and an International Olympic Committee member, says there has been
much speculation about gene doping.

   "Is there already gene doping going on? What will happen with the next
Olympic Games? Is it possible that we'll see the first games in Turin?"
Ljungqvist said.

   "I believe not. What about Beijing, and what about the future? So there is a
need for some clear statement from a real group of experts. Where are we? What
are the possibilities? What are the risks? And what can we do?"

LOAD-DATE: February 11, 2006


                              139 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2005 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                   November 16, 2005 Wednesday Final Edition

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 580 words

HEADLINE: Fighting for Travis; U.S. hospital stuns Hamilton family by denying
experimental surgery

SOURCE: The Hamilton Spectator

BYLINE: Christine Cox

BODY:

   The phone call from a New York hospital felt like a kick in the stomach to
Derek and Jenny Carter.

   A doctor told them that their son, Travis, is no longer being considered for
the groundbreaking surgical procedure they believe is his only hope of survival.

   Travis is seven years old and has a rare degenerative disorder called
Batten's disease. He's in a wheelchair, he has almost no speech and very little
vision.

   Just days ago, he was a candidate for pioneering gene transfer surgery at the
Weill Medical College at Cornell University. He had a tentative treatment date
of Dec. 6.

   The surgery would involve drilling holes into Travis's brain to deliver gene
therapy.

   But on Monday, his parents learned the hospital will not treat him. They've
been told that a neurosurgical team concluded that it was too high risk for
their son to undergo the procedure.

   The Carters see it as a death sentence for their child. They're devastated.

   "This was the only hope that he had out there," Jenny said. "I'm numb right
now."

   She said children with the disease don't reach their teens.

   The west Mountain family has been on an emotional roller-coaster since Travis
was diagnosed in October 2002. This time last year, he was next on the list for
surgery.

   Three children had been successfully treated but a fourth child died a few
weeks after her operation, and the clinical trial was put on hold temporarily.

   Last spring, Travis was back on the list again. Four dates were set for
treatment, but each time, Cornell postponed it.

   "How could they keep promising this to us?" Derek asked, his face etched with
frustration. "This isn't a free trip to California -- this is our son's life."

   The Carters are part of a small group of families who have raised roughly $6
million for research and treatment for Batten's disease through an organization
called Nathan's Battle Foundation.

   Thanks to overwhelming support from Hamilton, the Carters themselves have
raised about $309,000.

   "We put our hearts and souls into raising this money. Essentially, we put our
lives on hold," Derek said.

   They feel they have a responsibility to the community, as well as to their
son, to keep fighting for his treatment. They say children in a more advanced
stage of the disease were treated successfully.

   Last spring, Travis could still walk on a treadmill, with support.

   He can no longer do that, but he can still do standing exercises when
supported under the arms. He can still take food by mouth.

   Travis is a full-time Grade 2 student at Holy Name of Mary School in Ancaster
and enjoys classes. His mother says he's healthy, happy and understands
everything.

   His parents are confident that Travis would survive the surgery, but they've
always been willing to sign any document acknowledging the risks. They suspect
he was dropped as a candidate for treatment because the doctors want to protect
their success rate and their funding by selecting easier cases than Travis.

   But the Carters are not giving up. They are consulting lawyers about possible
legal action, with the goal of compelling the doctors to treat Travis.

   "We are desperate for help from anyone in the community that may have an idea
as to how we can proceed," Derek said yesterday.

   He and his wife hope the public will lobby the doctors involved at Weill
Cornell.

   More information is available at www.travisbattle.com or by phoning
1-800-546-7682.

   ccox@thespec.com

   905-526-3323

GRAPHIC: Photo: Barry Gray, the Hamilton Spectator; Derek Carter believes the
only chance his son has is cutting-edge surgery. But doctors have turned Travis
down, saying he is too sick.

LOAD-DATE: November 16, 2005


                              140 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2005 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                    November 15, 2005 Tuesday Final Edition

SECTION: CANADA/WORLD; Pg. A13

LENGTH: 583 words

HEADLINE: How hair-cloning could grow cure for cancer

SOURCE: The Associated Press

DATELINE: NEW YORK

BODY:

   Look around a crowd and you'll see that lots of middle-aged men are losing
their hair. As baby boomers, they have every right to demand, what is science
doing about this?

   Quite a bit, it turns out.

   A British company says five guys are walking around with hundreds more hairs
than they had before, thanks to an early test of what's been called hair
cloning. An American outfit hopes to start testing a similar approach next year.

   Other scientists are tracking genes that make some men susceptible to hair
loss.

   For example, how can men lose hair on the top of their heads while their
beards and eyelashes keep going strong?

   Black men are far less susceptible, but about a third of 30-year-old
Caucasian men have signs of what doctors call male-pattern baldness.

   By the time they're 50, about half of them do.

   Sure, some men say bald is beautiful.

   And others can smear on minoxidil (Rogaine) or take Propecia pills, or get
hair transplants.

   In fact, right now is "the best time in history to be going bald, because
there's an awful lot of things that can be done," says Dr. Ken Washenik.

   He is with the Aderans Research Institute in Philadelphia, which is
investigating the "hair cloning" approach.

   But the drugs don't help everybody, and not everyone is interested in a
transplant.

   So there's room for new approaches.

   To understand the search for new treatments, it helps to know a little about
hair and male pattern baldness.

   (Women can also get hormone-induced baldness like this, but it's not clear if
it's really the same condition).

   Everybody starts out with a lifetime supply of about 100,000 follicles on the
scalp, each primed to produce a single hair shaft.

   Normally, any given follicle pumps out that shaft for two years to six years,
then takes a break for a few weeks. Then it sheds that hair, and starts the
cycle over again.

   Each day, we lose about 100 hairs this way. No big deal; about an equal
number of follicles enter the growth phase on the same day, and at any one time
about 90 per cent to 95 per cent of the follicles are busy growing new hair.

   But in some men, in selected places on the scalp, this orderly process goes
awry. The hair-growing phase gets progressively shorter and the resting phase
gets longer.

   So the resulting hairs get shorter and shorter with each trip through the
cycle.

   Eventually, they don't even poke out through the scalp.

   What's more, affected follicles take longer to start growing hair again after
they've shed the last one. And they shrink, so the hair they produce is finer.
On your head, it's like replacing mighty trees with saplings. And the total
number of remaining hairs slips by about 5 per cent a year.

   What causes this? The full picture isn't known, but it clearly involves a
combination of genetic susceptibility and hormones, including testosterone.

   In any case, Washenik said, it's not just about hair.

   Hair follicles, after all, are organs. So what's learned from follicle
research may help other scientists who are working to regenerate bigger organs,
like the liver and kidneys, Washenik said.

   "The idea of growing hair on a bald scalp is only of moderate interest," said
Rodney Sinclair, of the University of Melbourne in Australia.

   Follicle research allows scientists to approach not just organ regeneration,
he said, but also questions about stem cells, cell growth and gene therapy that
may pay off someday in new treatments for diseases like cancer and Alzheimer's.

LOAD-DATE: November 15, 2005


                              141 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2005 Sun Media Corporation
                                The Toronto Sun

                            October 30, 2005 Sunday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 412 words

HEADLINE: TECH FIRMS RACE FOR NEW VACCINE;
CREAKY EXISTING METHOD TOO SLOW TO KEEP UP WITH OUTBREAK

BYLINE: BY AP

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO

BODY:

   The flu vaccine-making system that serves as the best available protection
against a pandemic relies on millions of chicken eggs, takes nine months to
produce each year's flu shots and has changed little since the 18th century.

   This creaky system poses a big problem if a new, deadly strain emerges once
the annual and inflexible production process begins.

   Several biotechnology companies are at work on a new and quicker way of
making a flu vaccine they hope can replace one that requires people to be
inoculated with the entire influenza virus. Their technique: Extract just a few
genes from the virus and inject it into people.

   The new technology, called DNA vaccines, is a form of gene therapy that
proponents argue is the best way to overhaul a 50-year-old vaccine manufacturing
system.

   In the meantime, most government and big pharmaceutical research funds are
still pouring resources into the egg-based process.

   BIG PROJECTS

   The U.S. government awarded Chiron Corp. $62.5 million last week to produce
shots that protect against the bird flu strain.

   Last month, Sanofi-Pasteur received $100 million for a similar government
project.

   Both companies still use eggs to manufacture vaccines.

   Chiron, the second-largest vaccine supplier in the U.S., also plans to spend
more than $100 million US updating its old egg-based factory in Liverpool,
England.

   Most government and big pharma efforts on the influenza vaccine front are
doing one thing new: They're seeking to shave a few weeks off the process by
trading in the chicken eggs for mammal cells, the standard brewing technique
used to make biotechnology drugs.

   The old and new vaccine-making techniques all rely, of course, on the same
principle: Tricking the body to create natural defences against disease.

   Under the current system, the three flu bug versions that are expected to be
the coming season's most prevalent strains are injected in chicken eggs to
multiply before undergoing a long process of inactivation, sterilization and
packaging.

   Flu also is the only vaccine made fresh every year because the virus mutates
so rapidly.

   QUICKER METHOD

   The gene jockeys touting DNA vaccines say they are getting close to making
vaccines with less effort. They claim they can soon produce flu vaccines in less
than three months that would allow for injecting people with key bits of a flu's
DNA.

   If a flu were to mutate into something unexpected, researchers say they can
simply grab a gene from the new strain and gin up more vaccine.

LOAD-DATE: October 30, 2005


                              144 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2005 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                    August 24, 2005 Wednesday Final Edition

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. A06

LENGTH: 509 words

HEADLINE: Teens work side-by-side with top researchers; Six students nominated
by science teachers

SOURCE: The Hamilton Spectator

BYLINE: Christine Cox

BODY:

   Rebecca Williamson is only 17, but she's already learned the lab techniques
used in molecular medicine and gene therapy.

   Williamson is one of six outstanding high school students who have been
working alongside world-class researchers at Hamilton Health Sciences over the
summer. Each of the students received a $1,500 bursary at a recognition ceremony
yesterday.

   The students were nominated for the program by the science department heads
at their schools. This year, the six selected were all female.

   Williamson, who lives in Burlington, was placed at the Juravinski Cancer
Centre with a research team doing a project on prostate cancer.

   "My future career goal is to be involved in research, so I thought this would
give me a step ahead in university and allow me to confirm that this is what I
want to do later," she said.

   Williamson graduated at the head of her class at Hillfield-Strathallan
College in June and will be heading to Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore
this fall.

   Her mentor at HHS was Dr. Gurmit Singh, director of research at the
Juravinski Cancer Centre and a professor of pathology and molecular medicine at
McMaster. Singh said Williamson was involved in transfecting cells -- putting
genes into cells, to turn on the process of cancer.

   "What she gained over the summer was an appreciation of how much team effort
is needed and what kinds of techniques are required," Singh said. "When she goes
into first- or second-year biology and someone is talking about transfecting
cells, she will know exactly what that means."

   Another local student selected for the program was Jennifer Shing, 17, of
Dundas. The Highland Secondary School graduate was at the Henderson Research
Centre with Dr. Patricia Liaw, whose field is blood coagulation and
inflammation.

   Liaw said Shing got a taste of translational research -- a combination of
basic science research and clinical research.

   "Her project focused on mechanisms by which chemotherapy drugs cause unwanted
blood clots," explained Liaw, an assistant professor in McMaster's department of
medicine. "Unwanted blood clots are the second leading cause of death in cancer
patients."

   Shing had a chance to use equipment that was far more modern and
sophisticated than anything in her high school science lab. Her work over the
summer included doing cell culture and taking plasma from the blood of cancer
patients.

   "We would run tests on (the samples) to measure the level of proteins that
were in them that help with the coagulation process," she said.

   Shing will be studying life sciences at the University of Toronto this fall.
She wants to become a doctor, but hasn't decided yet what area of medicine
she'll go into. She will put her $1,500 award toward her tuition.

   Alison Fox-Robichaud, one of the research mentors, said it's imperative to
get students interested in science and research at an early age.

   She described the high school students in the HHS program as "driven and
extremely talented."

   ccox@thespec.com

   905-526-3323

LOAD-DATE: August 24, 2005


                              145 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2005 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                      August 19, 2005 Friday Final Edition

SECTION: WELL-BEING; Pg. G06

LENGTH: 220 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy holds hope

SOURCE: The Hamilton Spectator

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   Scientists have taken a new step in the quest for gene therapy for muscular
dystrophy.

   Three years after researchers experimenting with mice discovered that gene
therapy might one day work, another team has found a way to deliver such therapy
throughout the body.

   University of Pittsburgh researchers were able to deliver a miniature gene --
similar to the defective gene involved in muscular dystrophy -- throughout the
bodies of mice, showing that systemic therapy is possible.

   Their findings are reported in the online edition of Proceedings of the
National Academy of Science.

   The researchers used a miniature gene, similar in function to the defective
one, and showed it could be delivered to muscles throughout the mouse, and the
animals exhibited some improvement.

   "While we have much farther to go until we can say gene therapy will work in
children, we have shown here a glimmer of hope by presenting the first evidence
of a successful gene therapy approach," said Dr. Xiao Xiao, associate professor
of molecular genetics and biochemistry. Co-author Dr. Chungping Qiao said it's
probably unrealistic to expect complete success using the mini-gene.

   Muscular dystrophy is a group of genetic diseases characterized by
progressive weakness and degeneration of muscles that control movement.

LOAD-DATE: August 19, 2005


                              150 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2005 Sun Media Corporation
                             Edmonton Sun (Alberta)

                             July 7, 2005 Thursday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFESTYLE; Checkup; Pg. 49

LENGTH: 660 words

HEADLINE: OUR PETS ARE PUDGY;
24% OVERWEIGHT: STUDY

BYLINE: BY SHELLY DECKER, EDMONTON SUN

BODY:

   FAT CAT: Just like their owners, pets are increasingly turning into couch
potatoes. A whopping 24% of our nation's pets are overweight, according to a
survey done for Hill's Pet Nutrition Canada.

   Plump pooches and fat felines have a long list of increased health risks,
including reduced lifespan, increased troubles of arthritis, torn knee ligaments
and high blood pressure.

   The recent survey of 1,025 Canadian adults found one in three owners don't
take their dog for a walk each day.

   Also, almost one in two masters rarely or never followed recommended serving
amounts listed on pet food packaging.

   The Canadian Veterinary Medical Association suggests that to help maintain a
healthy weight, a pooch needs 15 to 20 minutes of exercise at least three times
a day and a cat needs that amount twice daily.

   - - -

   RAMPAGING MICE MAKE NICE: An experiment that saw extremely aggressive mice
transformed into gentle creatures raises the possibility of the same change in
vicious people.

   B.C. scientists used a human gene on lab mice that had gone bad three years
ago after researchers accidentally deleted a gene that affects brain
development.

   The rodents were so nasty they killed mates, chewed siblings' tails and
attacked lab handlers.

   The University of British Columbia scientists wondered if the human form of
the deleted gene plays a role in aggression in people.

   The research findings suggest it does.

   Mutant mice embryos received the human version of the gene they were missing
and ended up being nice.

   Scientists fed mice with and without the gene the same food, put them in the
same type of cage and provided them with the same social interaction.

   The results raises the possibility that science could create a gene therapy
that could make nasty folk good.

   And since there are always those who worry about the evil potential of
science, one must also wonder about the potential for the gene therapy to make
nasty people even more vicious.

   The findings were reported this week in the Journal of Neuroscience.

   - - -

   SLOW WALKING BETTER PAY OFF: Forget about marching at warp speed, a new
survey offers good news for obese folk. University of Colorado at Boulder
researchers found that strolling can help overweight adults burn more calories
than brisk walking. As well, walking at a poky pace might put less stress on the
lower body and thus reduce the risk of arthritis and joint injuries.

   The research team studied 20 normal-weight men and women and another group of
20 obese adults. The groups walked set distances at different speeds.

   The result? Obese people burned more calories walking at a slower pace for a
longer time than walking at a faster speed. One of the researchers said it's
important to note that the team isn't suggesting people do less physical
activity or less vigorous activity. Rather, slow walking might burn a few extra
calories and reduce the risk of certain ailments. There was no word on how the
pace affected those of normal weight.

   - - -

   STOP CHEWING THE FAT: If you want to lose weight long-term, start reducing
the fat you consume and the pounds will start to drop.

   A recent issue of Mayo Clinic Health Letter offers these easy tips to help
you cut back your fat:

   - COOL IT: Chill soups, gravies and stews and then skim off fat that floats
to the top.

   - SKIM: Only young children need fat-rich milks such as homogenized or 2%. As
adults, we can get all the necessary nutrients by drinking skim milk. Save
calories and fat by trying fat-reduced yogurt, sour cream and cream cheese.

   - ADD ZIP WITHOUT FAT: Fat-free salad dressing can add pizzaz to salads or
veggies. Instead of mayonnaise, try spreading yogurt on a sandwich or in a pasta
sauce.

   - BEAN PROTEIN: Beans or legumes are rich in protein, high in fibre and low
in fat. Try using a variety of these flavourful products instead of meat. If
your family isn't keen on them, try whipping up beans in a blender and adding
the puree to a sauce. Chances are no one will notice the healthy addition.

GRAPHIC: photo from Sun files A new study says fat cats, like this one, are
beginning to match their overweight owners.

LOAD-DATE: July 7, 2005


                              152 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2005 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                     April 30, 2005 Saturday Final Edition

SECTION: FOCUS; Pg. F05

LENGTH: 846 words

HEADLINE: Turning a blind eye to laser surgery; Thanks to the laser technique,
Tiger Woods and several other sports giants now have better-than-great vision.
Is it fair play?

SOURCE: Spectator wire services

BYLINE: Clare Rudebeck

BODY:

   Nothing destroys a sporting reputation like steroids. In 1998, Mark McGwire
was a baseball hero. Wearing a T-shirt bearing the slogan, "If Popeye wants his
arms back -- he'll have to wait until October," he obliterated the record for
the number of home runs in a season.

   Last month, McGwire was branded a cheat for using a legal,
performance-enhancing steroid precursor, androstenedione, when he achieved the
feat.

   It may seem like a simple case of right and wrong. McGwire used a steroid
precursor, albeit one that was legal in baseball. But the line between right and
wrong in sport is being increasingly blurred.

   It is now possible to enhance performance through surgery and, very soon,
gene therapy. Accusations of double standards are in the air.

   When McGwire achieved his record, he was also wearing contact lenses.

   Natural vision is 20/20, but McGwire's lenses improved his vision to 20/10,
so he could see, at a distance of 20 feet, what a person of normal vision could
see at 10 feet.

   Clearly, that could make a difference when you're trying to hit a fast ball.
But the hearing, which criticized him for his artificially enhanced muscles,
made no mention of his artificially enhanced eyesight.

   Earlier this month, Tiger Woods won golf's biggest tournament, The Masters,
with the help of super-human eyesight. In 1999, he had laser eye surgery, which
gave him 20/15 vision. After the surgery, he won seven of his next 10 events.

   Other top golfers who have upgraded their vision include England's Lee
Westood, Fiji's Vijay Singh, Ireland's Padraig Harrington and America's Tom
Kite.

   The golfing establishment does nothing to stop players artificially improving
themselves in this way.

   The PGA European Tour, which represents top European golfers, had no comment
on the subject. While steroids bring public condemnation, laser eye surgery
provokes, at worst, curiosity.

   The closer you look, the murkier it becomes. Take the drug EPO
(erythropoietin), which is banned by the World Anti-Doping Agency (WADA), set up
to clean up sport. The drug, which increases the capacity of the blood to carry
oxygen, was developed in the mid-80s to help people who suffered from severe
anemia.

   Popular in endurance sports, it almost destroyed the European cycling circuit
in the '90s when stockpiles of the drug were confiscated from cyclists' hotel
rooms.

   However, altitude training -- used by many athletes -- has the same effect:
increasing the red blood cell count and enabling the blood to carry more oxygen.

   To save the inconvenience of travelling to a mountain, some athletes use
altitude chambers. Why is altitude training allowed, but not the use of EPO?
"Because using EPO is a health risk," says Russell Langley, a spokesman for U.K.
Sport, the government body which promotes excellence in sport.

   That taking EPO to enhance performance can be dangerous is unequivocal.

   Several deaths among professional cyclists in the late '80s and early '90s
have been linked to the drug. When WADA decides whether to ban a method or
substance, it uses three criteria, and the risk of harm is only one.

   The other two are whether it will enhance performance and whether it violates
the "spirit of sport". A method or substance must meet only two of the three
criteria to be banned. Arguably, altitude training enhances performance and
violates the "spirit of sport" because only athletes with wealthy sponsors can
afford it.

   Indeed, WADA is reviewing the use of altitude chambers, and they may be
outlawed by next year.

   The issue becomes murkier still when you delve into the next big threat to
the integrity of sport: gene doping. This involves injecting foreign DNA into an
athlete to achieve similar results to those achieved through drug-taking. But
there is no test for gene doping. Gene doping is in its infancy. Its effect on
humans is unknown.

   WADA does not consider it a threat to sport. But Dr. Andy Miah, a leading
British scientist, claims that so-called genetically-modified athletes could
already be competing in major events. "But it is not desirable for WADA to admit
it," he said, "because they have no measures in place to stop it."

   Miah predicts that the eight-second 100 metres could be achieved in a few
years with the help of gene doping. Meanwhile WADA, which recognized the threat
of gene doping two years ago, is developing a test for it, and is confident of
success.

   But Miah, who is among the country's leading bioethicists with positions at
Glasgow University, believes it may not be possible to test for all types of
gene doping.

   This may sound like the death knell for professional sport. But Miah believes
that gene doping could be good for sport if we changed our beliefs about
cheating.

   "The idea of the naturally perfect athlete is romantic nonsense," he says.

   "An athlete achieves what he or she achieves through all sorts of means --
technology, sponsorship, support. Using genetic modification is a continuation
of the way sport works; it allows us to create more extraordinary performances."

GRAPHIC: Photo: Tiger Woods

LOAD-DATE: April 30, 2005


                              154 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2005 Sun Media Corporation
                             Edmonton Sun (Alberta)

                            April 27, 2005 Wednesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 30

LENGTH: 1169 words

HEADLINE: A SLIPPERY SLOPE

SERIES: part 4 of 4

BYLINE: BY DOUG BEAZLEY, EDMONTON SUN

BODY:

   It's a revolution: in medicine, engineering, ethics and law. And it's
happening right here in Canada, of all places.

   In today's fourth and final instalment of our series on new medical
technologies, we look at the ethical minefield all of these new advances have
opened up.

   How can we enjoy the benefits of gene science while preserving the
individual's right not to be discriminated against because of his DNA? Can we
prevent startling new advances in brain science from turning into frightening
new technologies for coercion and control?

   The future could be everything we want it to be - or everything we're afraid
of.

   - - -

   "Now I say this, brethren, that flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of
God; neither does corruption inherit incorruption.

   "Behold, I shall show you a mystery; We shall not all sleep, but we shall all
be changed."

   - 1 Corinthians 15: 50-51

   "Long live the new flesh."

   - Videodrome (1983)

   In the 1980s, an American named John Moore was being treated for a form of
leukemia. During treatment, his doctor stumbled across a natural compound in his
spleen cells that looked to have great potential as a pharmaceutical. He sold
the commercial rights to a drug company for millions.

   Moore sued for property theft. In a landmark 1990 decision, the California
Supreme Court ruled five to four that the doctor was right and Moore was wrong -
that he had no legal property interest in his own body. Intellectual rights one,
biological rights nil.

   In the past few decades, we've seen a revolution in the science and
technology of medicine. Gene therapy, stem cells, prosthetics, mind-machine
interfaces, anti-aging science - so many impossible things are possible now, or
on the horizon.

   IT CUTS TWO WAYS

   But science is a sword that cuts two ways: the same technologies that may
free us from old forms of pain and death promise to bring us a whole new tangle
of ethical headaches.

   "The problem is that science moves incrementally. You're tinkering with small
things, focusing on the problem at hand," said Katherine Young, a religious
studies professor at McGill University who studies cultural concepts of death.

   "But the small things always lead to big things, and by the time we know the
big things we haven't done the ethical work to decide whether we want the kind
of world we've already built. The slippery slope is very real."

   Take stem cells, for example. These wonderfully plastic cells, which can grow
into any one of the dozens of tissue types making up a person, are found in only
a few parts of the adult body and in very early embryos.

   Scientists want to use them to restore human tissue, a therapy that could
cure everything from heart disease to Alzheimer's. But the work remains
extremely controversial, especially among those devoutly religious Canadians who
believe life begins at conception.

   Canadian law allows researchers access to embryos left over from human
fertility clinics, but bans all forms of cloning - including "therapeutic"
cloning used to create new stem cell lines.

   The cloning process that created Dolly the sheep is famously flawed; most of
the embryos produced by it are far too damaged to be brought to term. But
without studying cloning in the lab, many researchers say, science may be
missing new methods to grow and use stem cells without harvesting them from
human embryos.

   "Reproductive cloning is so clearly dangerous right now, there's a clear-cut
justification for banning it everywhere," said Tim Caulfield, Canada Research
Chair in health law and policy, University of Alberta.

   "But I think it's inappropriate to ban therapeutic cloning. I know there's a
concern that we may be 'commodifying' the human body, but I think it's a weak
argument. It hasn't stopped us from performing liver transplants to save lives."

   And yet, lawmakers are right to be alarmed at cloning technology, which opens
up the possibility of manufacturing humans without legal rights as sources of
medical tissue.

   The "commodification" argument sees biotechnology racing ahead of law,
turning the human body into a resource to be mined for profit.

   "There's a saying: science and law march together, but law has a limp," said
Margaret Somerville, a medical ethicist at McGill.

   At least the law in Canada is fairly clear; in the United States, it's a
basketcase.

   President George W. Bush, an evangelical Christian, has banned all research
on stem cell lines created after Aug. 9, 2001 (the ban is up for debate in the
U.S. Senate).

   But individual states can make up their own funding rules - California has
pledged $3 billion for therapeutic stem cell work. And researchers spending
privately sourced grants can do virtually whatever they like.

   "The law in the U.S. can only be described as incoherent," said Rosario
Isasi, a post-doc at the University of Montreal who has advised the UN on
biotechnology law.

   ARGUMENT WORKED

   It's also easier in the U.S. to patent genes. In Canada, said Somerville,
researchers have to prove they're patenting a process and not a living thing
before they can get the OK from the courts - the same argument that worked in
the Moore case.

   The whole field of biotech ethics becomes more perilous when you introduce
efforts to link human minds with machines.

   Two years ago, a research team in California announced it was going to start
testing the world's first brain prosthesis - an artificial hippocampus. The
hippocampus controls the formation of long-term memories; in people who've
suffered strokes or Alzheimer's, it doesn't work very well.

   The device offers the hope that victims of brain-wasting illnesses might get
their memories back. But it also threatens a whole new form of electronic
coercion - a device that could directly control memory and mood. If you're
thinking Big Brother, you're not the first.

   "It's theoretically possible to model any information in or out of the
peripheral nervous system - to modulate pain, pleasure, dreams, to measure
sensation," said Stephane Bedard, CEO of Victhom Human Bionics in Montreal.

   "It's possible now to play with the peripheral nervous system - to control
people. I think we have to be very, very careful."

   The trick, say researchers and ethicists, is to work out the moral questions
before the science becomes pervasive.

   "Look at cars," said U of A engineer Chris Backhouse. "At one point, electric
and internal combustion engines were at the same stage of technical development.

   "We had to make a decision on which direction we were going to take. That
decision shaped the world we're living in now, the urban sprawl and pollution.

   "It doesn't have to work that way. It could work the other way for a change -
we could have the benefits of this science without having to worry about, for
instance, losing our jobs or health insurance because of gene-testing."

   "We've done it before," said Somerville. "We've had nuclear weapons for
decades, but they've been used against human populations only twice.

   "The argument that suggests anything science says can be done, will be done,
is completely bankrupt. We always have a choice."

NOTES:  BUILDING A BETTER HUMAN

GRAPHIC: 2 photos 1. As scientists, probe ever more deeply into the human mind
and body, ethicists like 2. Margaret Somerville, worry about the moral and legal
questions that arise from such cutting-edge research.

LOAD-DATE: April 27, 2005


                              156 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2005 Sun Media Corporation
                             Edmonton Sun (Alberta)

                             April 26, 2005 Tuesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 29

LENGTH: 295 words

HEADLINE: STOP!

SERIES: Part 3 of 4

BYLINE: BY DOUG BEAZLEY, EDMONTON SUN

BODY:

   Here they are: Aubrey de Grey's Seven Deadly Sins of Aging. If we can fix
them, he says, we can all live to see the Oilers win another Stanley Cup.

   Keep in mind that this stuff is all blue-sky theory - no one knows how to do
any of it. Still, they laughed at Edison.

   - CELL LOSS Cells die over time, and as they die our organs begin to break
down. Stem cells, generic cells that can turn into any kind of tissue, could be
used to replace the loss.

   - CELL AGING As some cells get older, they stop dividing without dying.
Biologists think they may be causing some types of cancer. Gene therapy could be
used to get these cells to "commit suicide." Or the immune system could be
tricked into destroying them.

   - LYSOSOMAL JUNK Lysomes, organs in cells that break down cellular waste
products, get swamped by metabolic garbage over time. Gene therapy could give
them new enzymes to take out the trash.

   - EXTRACELLULAR JUNK Waste also collects between cells, a process that's been
linked to heart disease and Alzheimer's. Again, gene therapy could teach cells
to absorb this waste so the lysomes can get at it.

   - SUGAR-PROTEIN MOLECULAR BONDS As we get older, sugar molecules bond with
protein and cause hardening of tissues that leads to, among other things, high
blood pressure. Drugs are in development that can break these bonds.

   - MITOCHONDRIAL MUTATIONS Free radicals are unstable molecules left over from
respiration, the process that powers our cells. They can mutate DNA in the
mitochondria, the cell organ where respiration happens, and that can cause
diseases. Moving all cellular DNA into the cell nucleus could protect it from
harm.

   - NUCLEAR MUTATIONS Mutations in the DNA of the cell nucleus can cause
cancer. Radical gene therapy could make our cells more or less immune.

NOTES:  BUILDING A BETTER HUMAN

LOAD-DATE: April 27, 2005


                              157 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2005 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                      April 25, 2005 Monday Final Edition

SECTION: CANADA/WORLD; Pg. A10

LENGTH: 547 words

HEADLINE: News in Brief

SOURCE: Spectator wire services

BODY:

   Flying filmmaker dies making jump

   DELAND, FLA. A skydiving cinematographer was killed after his legs were
severed in a midair collision with the airplane he had jumped from.

   Albert Wing had already deployed his parachute Saturday when he struck the
wing of the DHC-6 Twin Otter propeller plane at about 180 metres, a witness told
police.

   Both of Wing's legs were severed at the knees, but he managed to land near
the DeLand Airport, 65 kilometres north of Orlando. He was airlifted to a
hospital, where he later died.

   Two children left alone, woman is charged

   TORONTO A Toronto woman has been charged with child abandonment after her two
young children were left alone for several hours while she was out drinking.

   Police were summoned to the women's apartment building early Saturday. They
discovered the two children, ages four and six, standing unattended in the
hallway of the apartment, where they live alone with their mother. The children
were unharmed and are now in the care of the Children's Aid Society.

   Space station crew lands safely in capsule

   ARKALYK, KAZAKHSTAN A space capsule carrying a U.S.-Russian-Italian crew
landed safely early yesterday, following a mission aboard the International
Space Station.

   Italian Roberto Vittori had spent eight days on the station while Russian
Salizhan Sharipov and American Leroy Chiao have been on the orbiting lab since
October.

   The station is now crewed by Russian Sergei Krikalev and American John
Phillips.

   At least 21 killed in Baghdad bombings

   BAGHDAD Iraqi insurgents staged carefully co-ordinated bombings in Saddam
Hussein's hometown and a Shiite neighbourhood of the capital yesterday, killing
at least 21 people.

   Legislators, meanwhile, said Iraq's new prime minister was ready to announce
a cabinet that would exclude his interim predecessor, Ayad Allawi.

   Insurgent attacks dropped dramatically shortly after the Jan. 30 elections,
but have spiralled upward in recent weeks as the politicians failed to name a
government.

   Gene therapy tested to delay Alzheimer's

   WASHINGTON The first attempt at gene therapy for Alzheimer's patients
appeared to significantly delay worsening of the disease in a few people who
tested it so far, scientists reported yesterday.

   More research is needed to see if the experimental treatment, which requires
a form of brain surgery, really helps. If so, researchers say delivering
protective substances called growth factors into a diseased brain holds the
potential to rescue some dying brain cells.

   Syrian troops leaving Lebanon after 29 years

   BEIRUT The pullout of Syrian troops from Lebanon continued yesterday as
soldiers loaded ammunition, burned documents and knocked down the walls of an
old base, effectively ending Syria's 29-year military domination of its smaller
neighbour.

   A Lebanese military officer said only 300 will remain behind until tomorrow
for a ceremony marking the formal end of Syria's military presence.

   The pullout of the last of 14,000 troops caps two months of intensive
international and domestic pressure on Damascus to get out of Lebanon, triggered
by the Feb. 14 assassination of former prime minister Rafik Hariri. The Syrians
entered Lebanon in 1976, ostensibly as peacekeepers in a year-old civil war.

LOAD-DATE: April 25, 2005


                              158 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2005 Sun Media Corporation
                                The Toronto Sun

                             April 25, 2005 Monday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 40

LENGTH: 265 words

HEADLINE: FRESH HOPE FOR ALZHEIMER'S;
STUDY: GENE THERAPY HELPS BRAIN CELLS RE-GROW

BYLINE: BY REUTERS

BODY:

   ALZHEIMER'S patients given gene therapy seemed to regrow damaged brain cells
and experienced a slower loss of their ability to think and remember, U.S.
scientists reported yesterday.

   The trial therapy was not without danger, however.

   Two patients who were treated while conscious but sedated suffered brain
damage when they moved during the procedure. One died weeks later.

   The treatment did appear safe if done under general anesthesia, the team
reported in the journal Nature Medicine, and they said they will try it in a
larger group of patients.

   For this gene therapy experiment, researchers took skin cells from eight
patients with mild Alzheimer's disease. They genetically modified the cells to
produce a protein called nerve growth factor, or NGF, a protein that prevents
cell death and stimulates cell function.

   They then infused these back into the patients' brains.

   "If validated in further clinical trials, this would represent a
substantially more effective therapy than current treatments for Alzheimer's
disease," said Dr. Mark Tuszynski, a neuroscience professor at UCSD who led the
study.

   "This would also represent the first therapy for a human neurological disease
that acts by preventing cell death."

   Positron emission tomography, or PET scans, done in four living patients
suggested they grew some new brain cells and had fresh brain activity, the
researchers said. Over the follow-up period of 22 months, the rate of cognitive
decline was reduced by up to 51%.

   "Currently approved medications have an estimated impact on these cognitive
measures of 5% to 27%," researchers wrote.

LOAD-DATE: April 26, 2005


                              161 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2005 Sun Media Corporation
                             Edmonton Sun (Alberta)

                             April 24, 2005 Sunday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 275 words

HEADLINE: SUN EXCLUSIVE: THE BRAVE NEW WORLD OF MEDICAL SCIENCE

BYLINE: BY DOUG BEAZLEY, EDMONTON SUN

BODY:

   It could be you, in five years' time - getting a coronary bypass from an
outpatient clinic in under an hour.

   It could be you in 20 years - getting a new kidney custom-grown for you in a
lab.

   Or a swell new set of robotic legs, better than the pair you lost.

   It could be you in 50 years' time - taking advantage of new therapies that
could stretch your lifespan out to a century or more.

   Starting today in the Sun, we'll be taking you on a four-day tour of the
cutting edge in medical science.

   From stem cells to gene therapy to bionics, new technologies are being
perfected by Canadian researchers that promise to revolutionize medicine - and
change what it means to be human.

   "We're at a really interesting stage in the science right now," said Tim
Caulfield, research director for the Health Law Institute at the University of
Alberta. "The basic science has been done, more or less. Now we're seeing
scientists work out practical applications for all this new knowledge. It's very
exciting."

   Exciting ... and nerve-racking. New technologies bring bleak new ethical
complications. Could we face a future where an individual's rights are
determined by his DNA? Where sophisticated brain scans serve as lie-detectors,
and offer the state powerful new methods of social control?

   Could the merging of human minds with machines create a whole new era of
class warfare - between the technologically enhanced 'haves' and the
'have-nots'?

   "For the first time in the history of science, we're actually thinking about
these questions before the technology becomes pervasive," said Caulfield.

   "That's a good thing. Things are moving very fast now. It pays to be
careful."

LOAD-DATE: April 24, 2005


                              162 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2005 Sun Media Corporation
                             Edmonton Sun (Alberta)

                             April 24, 2005 Sunday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 30

LENGTH: 1722 words

HEADLINE: A BOLD NEW WORLD;
CLOSER THAN YOU THINK

SERIES: Part 1 of 4

BYLINE: BY DOUG BEAZLEY, EDMONTON SUN

BODY:

   It's a revolution: in medicine, engineering, ethics and law. And it's
happening right here in Canada, of all places.

   Over the next four days, Sun writer Doug Beazley is going to take you on a
wild ride through the new medical science. From stem cells to gene therapy, from
bionics to mind-machine interfaces and the biology of religion - theories and
therapies are being pioneered here and around the world that are going to change
what it means to be human.

   Today, we take a look at two fields of research that are already yielding
life-saving treatments: gene therapy and stem cells.

   - - -

   It could be the magic bullet, the medical technology that puts surgery
permanently in the shade - if we can just figure out how to make the damn things
work.

   Stem cell therapies will be (eventually) the biggest revolution in medicine
since penicillin. Their potential applications are almost limitless - everything
from heart disease to brain damage. At the moment, however...

   "There are very few practical uses for stem cells right now," said Dr. Fabio
Rossi, Canadian Research Chair for Regenerative Medicine, University of British
Columbia.

   "Stem cells are starting to get overhyped. We worry about a backlash, like we
saw with gene therapy. A lot of people thought that (sequencing the human
genome) was going to have some sort of immediate therapeutic application, but
these things take time."

   What is a stem cell? You are - or at least you were, when you were just five
days old. Stem cells are generic tissue, capable of "differentiating" into some
or all of the hundreds of different types of tissue that make up the human body
- bone, blood, muscle, nerves, everything you are.

   There are two types of stem cells: embryonic and adult. Embryonic stem cells
are harvested from very early embryos at the "blastocyst" stage, when the embryo
is basically a tiny ball of identical cells. Scientists typically take stem
cells from embryos discarded after fertility treatments.

   HARDER TO GROW

   Adult stem cells are found in several parts of the body - in bone marrow, for
example - and have a far more limited ability to divide and differentiate than
embryonic stem cells. They're also harder to grow in the lab than embryonic
cells.

   Embryonic cells, on the other hand, can be grown in the lab indefinitely into
stem cell "lines," frozen for storage or shipped to other labs. That virtual
immortality, coupled with their knack for turning into any tissue, makes them a
lot easier than adult cells for scientists to work with.

   But the moral implications of using human embryos for research have made stem
cell work a legal minefield. In Canada, scientists can legally obtain embryonic
stem cells from existing lines, or grow their own from embryos donated from
fertility treatments. The only thing they're not allowed to do is clone human
embryos.

   "Despite all the discussion of stem cell research, there aren't actually a
whole lot of people working with embryonic stem cells," said Tim Caulfield,
Canada Research Chair in health law and policy at the U of A. "The emotional
nature of the debate could be making them reluctant."

   That said, there's some exciting work going on in this country. Dr. Rossi is
using adult cells from bone marrow to create what he hopes will be a new hip
replacement therapy.

   "One of the problems with standard hip replacements is that they don't always
work," he said. "The metal spike holding the hip together sometimes works itself
loose, which leads to a great deal of inflammation and pain - a real mess."

   Rossi's team is working on a "bio-glue" made of stem cells, protein molecules
called "growth factors" and minerals. The idea is that a patient requiring a hip
replacement would get a series of injections. The stem cells, using the minerals
and urged on by the growth factors, would regrow the missing bone - a new bone
in a syringe.

   A HUGE MEDIA SPLASH

   The Edmonton Protocol treatment for type 1 diabetes made a huge media splash
when U of A researchers announced positive results in humans in 1999.

   But knowing how to transplant insulin-producing islet cells isn't much use if
donated pancreases are in short supply - which they are.

   "So we want to use stem cells," said Dr. Jonathan Lakey, director of the U of
A's clinical islet isolation lab.

   "In theory it should work. Practically, it's more difficult. An islet is made
up of at least four different types of cells - it's really an organ inside an
organ. Also, the stem cells we've been producing in the laboratory seem to lose
the ability to produce insulin after a while."

   Ultimately, what scientists are chasing is a technique that would get adult
stem cells to differentiate and divide on cue. That would allow doctors to
inject the patient's own stem cells to treat anything from liver failure to
Alzheimer's, without any risk of the body rejecting the new tissue.

   "We're beginning to understand how cells talk to one another through the
exchange of growth factors," said Dr. Janet Rossant, a Toronto researcher
studying mouse embryos with the Mount Sinai Hospital. "There's a very
complicated network of these factors, regulating cell-to-cell interaction.

   "In the long run, we see science getting around the use of embryos as stem
cell sources. Stem cell therapy could lend itself to all kinds of degenerative
diseases, blood-borne diseases, cancer."

   In other words, stem cell therapy should revolutionize the whole concept of
"surgery" and provide treatments for diseases currently considered untreatable.

   But, like the man said, we're not there yet.

   - - -

   It hurt to breathe. Walking was no picnic either, and as for lifting anything
- forget about it.

   Four years ago, Roger Archer, 66, held a custodial job at an Edmonton
Catholic school. He was scrubbing the hall floors early one morning when the
first wave of pain hit him, like a brick thrown squarely at his chest.

   "The pains went away. Then they came back," he said. "Every time I took a
breath, it hurt."

   At the hospital, the doctors diagnosed it as angina pain due to
atherosclerosis - in Archer's case, all of the arteries feeding oxygen to his
heart were jammed with fatty deposits.

   Untreated, it would kill him. Nobody knew how to treat it.

   "They said there were too many plugged arteries for them to work on," said
Archer. "My dad and my uncle both died of heart attacks in their 50s. I figured,
well ... it's my turn now."

   A PERFECT FIT

   But the widespread arterial damage that made Archer a poor candidate for
traditional bypass surgery made him a perfect fit for something totally new. His
cardiologist referred him to scientists at the University of Alberta working on
a way to convince the heart to repair itself, without surgery.

   The so-called Northern Trial is being conducted on human patients at six
cardiac hospitals across the country, including the U of A and St. Michael's in
Toronto. It's one of the more promising applications of gene therapy - the use
of cloned DNA to urge the human body to heal itself.

   "It's exciting. This is where it's at," said Dr. Wayne Tymchak, one of the U
of A cardiologists working on the trial.

   Here's how it works. Using a computer mapping system called NOGA, doctors
build up a 3-D image of the damage in the patient's heart. A catheter is
inserted through an artery in the groin, and a surgeon makes about 10 injections
directly into the heart muscle.

   The injection is a serum of "naked DNA" - in this case, a lab clone of a gene
that encourages the growth of new blood vessels. The whole process takes an
afternoon; patients don't even need to stay in hospital overnight.

   "It should be only a couple of years before it's ready for wider use," said
Dr. Duncan Stewart, lead investigator on the Northern Trial and head of
cardiology at St. Michael's Hospital in Toronto.

   "If it works very well, I'd like to see it made available on a compassionate
basis."

   It seems to be working. In Archer's case, the injections led to the growth of
a whole new network of vessels that end-run around his clogged arteries - an
injectable bypass.

   "It only took about a week before I noticed the pain was pretty much gone,"
he said. "I haven't needed to take any medication. I couldn't work anymore and I
have to take it easy, but hey, I'm alive."

   The Northern Trial stands on the front line of practical gene therapy - one
of the first working attempts to exploit the potential unlocked by the
sequencing five years ago of the human genome, the body's 'book of
instructions.'

   "I think that when the human genome was fully sequenced, a lot of people out
there thought we'd immediately know everything and be able to cure everything,"
said Dr. Chris Backhouse, U of A engineering.

   "Not true. All we've got is the gene sequence of some French guy. The real
challenge now is to find ways to make use of that information, to make it pay."

   Backhouse has built a gadget he calls a "tricorder" (like a lot of engineers,
he's a Star Trek fan). The tricorder uses a spinoff of nanotechnology called
"microfluidics" to conduct tests for specific genetic diseases.

   The incredibly tiny scale on which the tricorder operates allows a lab to use
the very smallest amounts possible of the re-agents needed for gene tests - some
of which cost up to $1 million per gram. Gene sequencing made it possible -
nanotech is making it affordable.

   HAMMERING AWAY

   "When we analyze a tumour using conventional techniques, it's like taking a
Swiss watch apart with a hammer," said Backhouse.

   "We don't understand cancer. If we could do genetic workups quickly and
cheaply, we could come up with much more effective cancer treatments."

   Across the hall at Chemical and Materials Engineering, Dr. Hasan Uludag is
using a special polymer to insert short lengths of DNA into cells. He hopes the
technique will be used someday to permanently cure genetic diseases of the
blood, such as hemophilia and sickle-cell anemia.

   "In hemophilia, for instance, there's a blood protein called Factor 9 that is
either not present or not working as it should," he said. "We're focusing on
delivering DNA to the bone marrow.

   "We're still at the experimental stage, and at least five or 10 years away
from testing on human subjects. We tried inserting foreign DNA into rat cells,
and it works."

   Five or 10 years away from new medical techniques that could address the
biggest killers on the planet - from AIDS to cancer. The future is closer than
you think.

NOTES:  Building a Better Human

GRAPHIC: photospread 3 photos 1. photo illustration by Sun Media 2. photo by
Shannon Jones, Special to the Edmonton Sun Roger Archer is living proof of the
wonders of gene therapy. The Edmontonian had the therapy in 2002 on the blocked
arteries of his heart, and now lives a normal life. 3. photo Islet cells, which
have been used with great success in the treatment of diabetes. They may be
supplanted by stem cells.

LOAD-DATE: July 11, 2005


                              165 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2005 Sun Media Corporation
                                The Toronto Sun

                              April 1, 2005 Friday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; CANADA Briefs; Pg. 41

LENGTH: 65 words

HEADLINE: OTTAWA GIVES $5M TO STEM CELL STUDIES

BODY:

   JUSTICE MINISTER Irwin Cotler announced annual funding of more than $5
million yesterday for stem cell research, including the use of such cells to
help repair damaged hearts, lungs and blood vessels.

   Later this spring, patients in the late stages of the pulmonary arterial
hypertension disease, will take part in a trial that will attempt to combine
stem cells and gene therapy to treat it.

LOAD-DATE: April 1, 2005


                              166 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2005 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                      March 29, 2005 Tuesday Final Edition

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 431 words

HEADLINE: Hamilton whiz kid is science all-star

SOURCE: The Hamilton Spectator

BYLINE: Christine Cox

BODY:

   Natalie Raso is one of Canada's top teen scientists.

   The Grade 10 student from St. Thomas More Catholic Secondary School, in
Hamilton, will be a member of Team Canada at the Intel International Science and
Engineering Fair in Phoenix this May.

   She is among eight students selected by the Youth Science Foundation to
represent Canada at the Stanley Cup of science fairs. Her project is on using
viruses to kill cancer.

   "Team Canada demonstrates that Canada's top high-school scientists are doing
world-class research -- real science that is a far cry from the simplistic
projects many associate with science fairs," said Reni Barlow, executive
director of Youth Science Foundation Canada.

   A panel of university professors, scientists, engineers and educators chose
the members of the team. Raso was picked after submitting a video and five-page
summary of her project.

   It's yet another honour for Raso, 16. Last year, her success at the
Canada-Wide Science Fair earned her an all-expenses paid trip to the APEC Youth
Science Festival in Beijing.

   At that event, students from around the world were put in 40 groups and asked
to write a paper on a specific topic. Raso's group took first prize with a paper
on gene therapy.

   The trip to China was "an amazing experience", Raso said. It also made her
appreciate Canada more.

   Raso first heard about virus therapy while she was in China. It piqued her
interest so much that she contacted the Centre for Gene Therapeutics at McMaster
University after her return. That led to meetings with researchers Karen Mossman
and Jeff Hummel, who are working on a virus with the potential to treat cancer.

   "I wanted to test if it was an effective and safe virus therapy," Raso said.
"I wanted to investigate that by testing it on cancerous cells and non-cancerous
cells."

   Raso said the virus selectively killed all cancer cells during the course of
the experiment, but did not kill a single normal cell.

   Raso carried out her project at a Mac lab, under the guidance of Mossman and
Hummel. Since last November she's been working on it five days a week, after her
regular school day plus basketball and volleyball practice.

   The project is also her entry for the Bay Area Science and Engineering Fair,
which runs tomorrow through Saturday at Sheridan College, Oakville.

   Raso hopes to win a trip to this year's Canada-Wide Science Fair in Vancouver
so that she can attend it as well as the international one in Phoenix. She wants
to be a doctor, combining clinical practice with research.

   ccox@thespec.com

   905-526-3323

GRAPHIC: Photo: Ron Pozzer, the Hamilton Spectator; Natalie Raso, 16, does a
cell culture at McMaster University. She first learned about virus therapy while
she was in China last year.

LOAD-DATE: March 29, 2005


                              168 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2005 Sun Media Corporation
                             Edmonton Sun (Alberta)

                            March 10, 2005 Thursday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFESTYLE; Pg. 65

LENGTH: 174 words

HEADLINE: GROWING NEW TEETH WITH STEM CELLS STEP CLOSER

BYLINE: BY REUTERS

DATELINE: NEW YORK

BODY:

   We may not be very far away from a time when dentists offer to help people
with damaged or missing teeth grow new ones, according to new research presented
yesterday.

   A series of presentations at a dental meeting demonstrate that techniques
using stem cells and gene therapy to regenerate teeth are producing promising
results, suggesting this technique may not be far off.

   "I think it's looking like quite an exciting technology for the near future,"
said Dr. Tony Smith, editor of the Journal of Dental Research, who was not
involved in any of the newest studies.

   Smith explained that the presentations describe techniques that enable
dentists to coax existing teeth into repairing and regenerating themselves, and
techniques where dentists can "start from scratch."

   Clearly, techniques that involve adding new tissue to already-existing teeth
are "probably a bit closer on the horizon," perhaps within a "handful of years,"
Smith predicted. Techniques that grow teeth from scratch will likely take at
least another 10 years to perfect, he added.

LOAD-DATE: March 10, 2005


                              169 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2005 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                     March 9, 2005 Wednesday Final Edition

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. SP03

LENGTH: 924 words

HEADLINE: That's the way the ball - or puck - bounces; Way Offside

SOURCE: The Hamilton Spectator

BYLINE: Scott Radley

BODY:

   A Brazilian soccer player -- who has twice been suspended for violence --
could be suspended without pay for up to 540 days for punching another player
this week. Or signed to a multi-million-dollar deal when the NHL returns ...
Volatile college basketball coach Bobby Knight won his 850th career game on the
weekend. His players marked the occasion by showering him with profanities ...
Mark Burnett's new boxing reality show, The Contender, began this week. In a bid
to build up the contestants' confidence, all the fighters will soon square off
with Mike Tyson ... Major League Soccer has targeted Toronto for expansion by
2007. And for bankruptcy by 2008 ... Montreal Canadiens great Serge Savard will
stand trial in October for drunk-driving. The charges stem from an incident in
which police stopped his car and asked him to walk a straight line for a
sobriety test but the best he could do was a Spin-o-rama ... Serena Williams
dropped out of a semifinal match against unseeded Jelena Jankovic claiming her
arm hurt and blaming equipment for the injury. Funny, that's the same thing
Andrew Golota said after his fight against Riddick Bowe was stopped for repeated
low blows several years ago ... Jose Canseco says gene therapy will soon replace
steroids as the way to create super athletes. When he heard the news, Jason
Giambi immediately went out and bought thousands of shares in Levis ... The
Scottish government has established a new program to get sedentary teenage girls
active in sports. Its first initiative? Getting sedentary teenage boys
interested in sports ... BBC broadcasters say Manchester United star Wayne
Rooney was recorded using nearly 100 swear words last month in a televised game
against Arsenal. The outburst earned him hockey parent of the week honours ... A
Wake Forest University basketball player was suspended one game for clobbering
an opponent in the groin during a game last weekend. While the NCAA was unhappy
with the episode, the clip was chosen a finalist on America's Funniest Home
Videos ... Darryl Strawberry is at the Mets' camp as a special instructor.
Because even pros need to know how to balance the demands of crack, hookers and
baseball ... Heavy snow didn't stop Olympic of Marseille and Saint Etienne from
playing their French League One soccer match on the weekend. Yet heavy snow has
postponed the final downhill ski race of the season. Go figure ... New England
Patriot quarterback Tom Brady's 4,000-square-foot Boston-area bachelor pad is
now up for sale for the bargain-basement price of $1,475,000. If it sells, it'll
be the first time he's given up possession all year ... NHL players and owners
are meeting again to try to get a deal done so next season can start on time.
Everyone is optimistic it'll happen, as long as next season is scheduled to
start sometime in 2007 ... Tiger Woods beat Phil Mickelson by one stroke at the
Ford Championship when the lefty's chip from the fringe on 18 lipped out. In a
related story, David Duval's chip from the fringe on 18 also lipped out -- of
hole number 2 ... Not everyone is happy with the sexy image cultivated by highly
touted rookie racer Danica Patrick, the Indy Racing League's lone female driver.
Apparently, in the world of car racing, there's room for only one pretty driver.
And his name is Jeff Gordon ... Twenty men and just one woman on the circuit,
eh? When did the IRL become the Smurfs? ... Finally, some Boston fans paid as
much as $250 for tickets to the Red Sox-Yankees spring training game on Monday
just so they could taunt the New Yorkers about last fall's playoff collapse. And
you said you wouldn't learn anything useful reading the paper today.

   sradley@thespec.com

   905-526-2440

   Way Offside runs every Wednesday and Saturday.

   Danica Patrick

   DOUBLE TAKE

   Today we offer an all-Hamilton edition. On the left, intense pro golfer Todd
Hamilton. At right, intense Hamilton-born NYPD Blue star Currie Graham.

   There was a time when any decent sports fan could name the home arena or
stadium of every team in pro sports. No longer. Go ahead and try to match the
team on the left with its home. If you get more than a handful correct, you're
doing well.

   Answers:

   1. Pittsburgh Pirates

   2. Seattle Seahawks

   3. Indianapolis Colts

   4. Florida Panthers

   5. Philadelphia 76ers

   6. Boston Bruins

   7. Denver Broncos

   8. Oakland Athletics

   9. Arizona D-backs

   10. Texas Rangers

   11. Chicago White Sox

   12. St. Louis Rams

   13. San Francisco Giants

   14. Florida Marlins

   15. San Francisco 49ers

   16. Montreal Canadiens

   17. San Diego Padres

   18. Philadelphia Phillies

   19. Washington Redskins

   20. Philadelphia Eagles

   21. Edmonton Oilers

   22. Jacksonville Jaguars

   23. St. Louis Blues

   24. Seattle SuperSonics

   25. Houston Texans

   26. Baltimore Ravens

   27. Houston Astros

   a. TD Banknorth Gardens

   b. SBC Park

   c. Bell Centre

   d. KeyArena

   e. Savvis Center

   f. Reliant Stadium

   g. M+T Bank Stadium

   h. Edward Jones Dome

   i. Minute Maid Park

   j. Bank One Ballpark

   k. Dolphin Stadium

   l. PETCO Park

   m. RCA Dome

   n. U.S. Cellular Field

   o. FedEx Field

   p. Lincoln Financial Field

   q. Wachovia Center

   r. McAfee Coliseum

   s. Monster Park

   t. Rexall Place

   u. PNC Park

   v. Ameriquest Field

   w. Qwest Field

   x. Office Depot Center

   y. Citizens Bank Park

   z. Alltel Stadium

   # Invesco Field

   1-u, 2-w, 3-m, 4-x, 5-q, 6-a, 7-#, 8-r, 9-j, 10-v, 11-n, 12-h, 13-b, 14-k,
15-s, 16-c, 17-l, 18-y, 19-o, 20-p, 21-t, 22-z, 23-e, 24-d, 25-f, 26-g, 27-i,

GRAPHIC: Photo: ; Photo: No, this is not a reprint. For the second week in a
row, an area paper has called our hockey team the Bulls. We won't mention the
paper's name, but it's from the same city as that famous NHL team, the Maples.

LOAD-DATE: March 10, 2005


                              170 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2005 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                       March 4, 2005 Friday Final Edition

SECTION: WELL-BEING; Pg. G07

LENGTH: 214 words

HEADLINE: Promising gene therapy has been a bust

SOURCE: Hamilton Spectator wire services

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   Fifteen years after experiments with human gene therapy began in earnest, a
U.S. federal drug advisory panel will discuss today the death of a French child
in one such experiment and why, after so many years of hope, the technology has
been such a disappointment.

   Three major gene therapy trials in the United States have been suspended
pending the outcome of the meeting. Dr. Donald Kohn, the principal investigator
in one of those trials, said that the type of immune deficiency in his trial's
patients was different from that in the French research and that the genes that
were made the target of the therapies were therefore also different.

   For years, gene therapy was heralded as a technology that would soon yield
blockbuster drug innovations. The National Institutes of Health issued thousands
of grants to pursue the research, hundreds of patents have been granted on the
technology, and more than 150 biotechnology companies have been created in the
last 15 years to exploit it.

   Gene therapy's disappointing history is mirrored in other medical
technologies once highly promoted, like the decoding of the human genome.
Reaping the fruits of such technological advances is taking much longer than
executives in biotechnology and pharmaceuticals once suggested.

GRAPHIC: Photo: gene therapy

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 2005


                              176 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2005 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                     January 11, 2005 Tuesday Final Edition

SECTION: CANADA/WORLD; Pg. A12

LENGTH: 346 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy could block full-blown AIDS

SOURCE: The Hamilton Spectator

BYLINE: Patricia Reaney

DATELINE: LONDON

BODY:

   A single change in a human gene may hold the key to preventing people living
with HIV from progressing to full-blown AIDS, researchers said on yesterday.

   They found a crucial difference between a gene in humans and one in rhesus
monkeys that blocks infection of the virus in the animals -- a finding that
offers new insights into the origins of AIDS and gene therapy.

   Had the gene been the same in humans, scientists at the National Institute of
Medical Research in London believe, there may not have been the AIDS epidemic
that now affects 40 million people worldwide.

   "If it had recognized HIV, we probably would never have had AIDS. I believe
it is a key change," said Dr. Jonathan Stoye, head of virology at the institute.

   Scientists had been aware that it was much more difficult to infect monkey
cells with HIV than human cells in laboratory experiments, which suggested there
was something different in the animal cells that blocked infection.

   A gene called Trim 5 alpha was later found to be the reason why. In monkeys,
but not in humans, it stops the virus from replicating.

   Stoye and his team studied differences in the gene products of the monkey and
human Trim 5 alpha genes. They pinpointed one specific change in a protein that
was important in blocking HIV. By substituting a human protein with a
monkey-derived protein they found they could make the human cells resistant to
HIV.

   "The discovery has significant implications for the development of effective
gene therapy to combat AIDS," said Stoye, who reported the findings in the
journal Current Biology.

   He and his team believe introducing the gene carrying that single change back
into human cells would make those cells resistant to HIV infection.

   Gene therapy is an experimental technique which introduces genetic material
into cells to fight disease. The technique has been used for Parkinson's disease
and in trials for illnesses such as cystic fibrosis and cancer.

   "If you have HIV this might be a form of therapy to prevent progression to
AIDS," said Stoye.

   Reuters

LOAD-DATE: January 11, 2005


                              178 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2004 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                    October 23, 2004 Saturday Final Edition

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. A07

LENGTH: 474 words

HEADLINE: Mac extols 'new voyage'; Site unveiled for innovative research

SOURCE: The Hamilton Spectator

BYLINE: Dave Kewley

BODY:

   Personalized medicines produced by gene manipulation to treat diseases such
as breast cancer, asthma and rheumatoid arthritis will soon be created and
tested in a new research facility at McMaster University.

   Yesterday, university officials proudly unveiled the state-of-the-art
Institute for Molecular Medicine and Health, which occupies the fourth and fifth
floors of the new, $70-million Michael G. DeGroote Centre for Learning and
Discovery.

   Peter George, McMaster president, said the new facility will be the site for
innovative research that will redefine the possibilities of health care. "This
shows we are not just teachers, but discoverers, and today we are celebrating
the start of a new voyage."

   The celebration was highlighted by the presence of Rolf Zinkernagel of
Switzerland, a co-winner of the 1996 Nobel Prize for medicine for his
discoveries in the field of immunology.

   The institute includes the Centre for Gene Therapeutics, which aims to
develop new vaccines for infectious and immune diseases; the Centre for
Functional Genomics, with a mission to develop new technologies and to exploit
advances in gene profiling, and the first "good manufacturing practice" (GMP)
laboratory in Canada capable of producing agents to carry new vaccines into the
body during human trials.

   Prof. Jack Gauldie, chair of the Department of Pathology and Molecular
Medicine, is particularly happy with the air tight GMP lab, which includes air
locks and high-tech air filtering systems to assure the purity of medicines
produced and to qualify for a licence to conduct human trials on site.

   Gauldie says until now there was no facility like this in Canada and
researchers had to send materials to laboratories in the United States, which
was both time-consuming and extremely expensive.

   "The last project we sent out cost us over $400,000," he says.

   He adds the institute's new facilities "place us among the best in the world
at being able to move basic science to the bedside as rapidly as possible."

   Offering an example of how gene therapy works for cancer treatment, Gauldie
says blood cells are taken from the patient and manipulated in the lab for about
nine days in a process that turns them into powerful cells that stimulate the
body's immune system.

   They are then loaded with genes from the patient's tumour, the target cells,
and then reintroduced in the patient's bloodstream.

   The anticipated result is the newly empowered cells recognize antigens from
cancer cells and begin an attack that eventually destroys the tumour.

   "This methodology has already been used in a number of labs around the world
and has provided ample bits of success that has worked in some patients," he
says. "Our goal now is to try to go on and further improve those results."

   dkewley@thespec.com 905-526-3474

GRAPHIC: Photo: Barry Gray, the Hamilton Spectator; Prof. Jack Gauldie shows
state-of-the-art laboratories at the Institute for Molecular Medicine and
Health.

LOAD-DATE: October 23, 2004


                              179 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2004 Sun Media Corporation
                                The Toronto Sun

                    October 20, 2004 Wednesday Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 41HEALTH Briefs

LENGTH: 96 words

HEADLINE: GENE CLEARS FIRST HURDLE

DATELINE: BUENOS AIRES

BODY:

   The first three patients participating in an early test of a 'revolutionary'
human gene therapy for erectile dysfunction have not developed any
treatment-related side effects, according to preliminary results released here
this week at a meeting of the International Society for Sexual and Impotence
Research.

   Dr. Albert Melman, of the Albert Einstein College of Medicine in New York,
and colleagues are testing the safety of a single penile injection of a gene
called maxi-K.

   The trial was launched in the spring of 2004 at the Mount Sinai School of
Medicine in New York.

LOAD-DATE: October 20, 2004


                              180 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2004 Sun Media Corporation
                                The Toronto Sun

                    October 14, 2004 Thursday Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 26HEALTH Briefs

LENGTH: 49 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY FOR GLAUCOMA

DATELINE: NEW YORK

BODY:

   In animal experiments, researchers have achieved permanent transfer of a
functioning gene to targeted tissues in the eye, in what they say is the first
step toward gene therapy for glaucoma. The experiments are reported in the
online issue of Investigative Ophthalmology and Visual Science.


LOAD-DATE: October 14, 2004


                              184 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2004 Sun Media Corporation
                         Edmonton Sun (Alberta, Canada)

                    September 13, 2004 Monday Final Edition

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. SP2Today in Sports

LENGTH: 277 words

HEADLINE: GENES, GENES MADE A MACHINE

BYLINE: BY CP

DATELINE: ST. JOHN'S, Nfld.

BODY:

   The last blood samples from Athens have yet to be tested, but already
athletes and the agencies that regulate them are looking ahead to the next
summer Olympics where some experts believe the world could see its first
genetically modified athletes in competition.

   While doping watchdogs have made major advances in combating drug use among
athletes, advances in gene therapy has potentially put a ,new arsenal into the
hands of cheats, says Dr. Colin Higgs, vice-president of scientific services for
the International Council for Sport Science and Physical Education.

   "We may see the first gene-doped athletes by 2008," said Higgs. "If you had
$1 million you could probably get the technology to do that."

   Researchers at the University of Pennsylvania who injected a gene-loaded
virus into the muscles of mice saw their size and growth rate increase 15 to 30
per cent. Combined with an exercise program, the rats doubled their muscle
strength.

   There are several projects looking at blocking the genetic disruption of
myostatin, the protein that limits muscle growth.

   "If it's not here, it's just around the corner," said Paul Melia, CEO of the
Canadian Centre for Ethics in Sports.

   "Unfortunately, when the medical science profession develops legitimate
therapeutic uses to treat illnesses ... athletes who are trying to cheat will
exploit that."

   Rumours circulated about East German athletes using drugs to enhance their
performance 20 years before it was proven, said Higgs.

   "The stakes are now so high. The value of international success is so great
that there are real pressures on athletes to do what it takes to get to the
top," he said.

LOAD-DATE: September 15, 2004


                              189 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2004 Sun Media Corporation
                         Edmonton Sun (Alberta, Canada)

                      August 1, 2004 Sunday Final Edition

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. SP11

LENGTH: 363 words

HEADLINE: DOPING FUTURE: IT'S IN THE GENES

BYLINE: BY JIM KERNAGHAN, SUN MEDIA

BODY:

   There's a frightening new kid on the performance-enhancing block. It sounds
like science fiction, but gene therapy, if the cheats in sports are able to
harness it, could make all the stimulants and steroids look like child's play.

   Imagine this: A shot putter steps up and rockets the iron ball 40 metres. Or
a field goal kicker thumps one between the uprights from 80 yards. Or a high
jumper clears three metres. The potential for a new wave of sports cheating
isn't far away via genetic engineering, it appears.

   Researchers have used gene therapy experiments on mice and rats, to promote
exceptional muscle growth, such as powerful shoulders and haunches, and it can
be replicated in humans.

   The research is designed to benefit the elderly and those with muscle-wasting
diseases, but the sports applications are obvious.

   The therapy produces increased levels of IGF-1, an insulin-like growth factor
and a protein that promotes muscle growth and repair.

   Lab rats showed a 35% strength gain in targeted muscles and didn't lose any
of it when experiments at the University of Pennsylvania ceased.

   "I wouldn't be surprised if somebody (in sports) is trying it as we speak,"
University of Western Ontario genetics expert Dr. Shiva Singh said.

   Inundated with calls

   "If you can do it for a diseased muscle, why can't you do it for a normal
muscle?"

   The University of Pennsylvania's Lee Sweeney, chair of the physiology
department, says researchers have been inundated with calls from weightlifters
and body-builders. Even a high school football coach wanted his team treated. He
says it's an easy process for, say, a strengthened leg.

   "I would put the whole leg on bypass," he said. "I would isolate the leg and
put in the virus through the blood. This is nothing a vascular surgeon couldn't
do."

   Here's the scary part from the standpoint of those seeking to weed out the
cheats: It would be hard to detect. Gene therapy would not be detectable through
the normal tests - blood, urine or saliva samples - only through muscle
biopsies.

   Like steroids, gene therapy was designed for medical purposes. And, like
steroids, it opens the door for athletic abuse.

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2004


                              190 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2004 Sun Media Corporation
                         Edmonton Sun (Alberta, Canada)

                       July 30, 2004 Friday Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 36

LENGTH: 330 words

HEADLINE: PIONEER OF DNA DIES;
SCIENTIST FOUND STRUCTURE

BYLINE: BY AP

DATELINE: SAN DIEGO

BODY:

   Nobel Prize-winning scientist Francis Crick, who with James Watson discovered
the spiral "double-helix" structure of DNA, paving the way for everything from
DNA blood tests to genetically engineered tomatoes, has died. He was 88.

   Crick died Wednesday at University of California, San Diego, Thornton
Hospital, according to Brendolyn Williams, a spokesman for the Salk Institute,
the research body where Crick worked. Crick had been battling colon cancer.

   It was in 1953, while working in Cavendish Laboratory in Cambridge, England,
that the British-born Crick, then 36, and American-born Watson, 24, hit upon the
famous double-helix structure - like a twisted ladder - of deoxyribonucleic
acid, or DNA.

   Not until years after the discovery were Crick and Watson's conclusions about
the molecular structure of DNA firmly established. At the time, Crick later
said, only a small number of people "even thought it was interesting."

   A half-century later, the biotechnology industry is based largely upon Crick
and Watson's discovery. So, too, are genetically engineered foods like tomatoes
and innovative medical technologies like gene therapy.

   Law enforcement agencies now routinely collect and test DNA from crime
scenes, either to convict the guilty or set the innocent free. Social issues
such as whether to have children are now often affected by expanded knowledge of
DNA and its role in heredity.

   The two were awarded the Nobel Prize in physiology or medicine in 1962.

   In a statement yesterday, Watson hailed Crick "for his extraordinarily
focused intelligence and for the many ways he showed me kindness and developed
my self-confidence."

   "He treated me as though I were a member of his family," Watson said. "Being
with him for two years in a small room in Cambridge was truly a privilege. I
always looked forward to being with him and speaking to him, up until the moment
of his death."

   The discovery was retold in Watson's 1968 bestseller The Double Helix.

GRAPHIC: photo of FRANCIS CRICK; 1953 discovery

LOAD-DATE: July 30, 2004


                              194 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2004 Sun Media Corporation
                                The Toronto Sun

                       July 26, 2004 Monday Final Edition

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. 81

LENGTH: 362 words

HEADLINE: DOPING FUTURE: IT'S IN THE GENES

BYLINE: BY JIM KERNAGHAN, SUN MEDIA

BODY:

   THERE'S A frightening new kid on the performance-enhancing block. It sounds
like science fiction, but gene therapy, if the cheats in sports are able to
harness it, could make all the stimulants and steroids look like child's play.

   Imagine this: A shot putter steps up and rockets the iron ball 40 metres. Or
a field goal kicker thumps one between the uprights from 80 yards. Or a high
jumper clears three metres. The potential for a new wave of sports cheating
isn't far away via genetic engineering, it appears.

   Researchers have used gene therapy experiments on mice and rats, to promote
exceptional muscle growth, such as powerful shoulders and haunches, and it can
be replicated in humans.

   The research is designed to benefit the elderly and those with muscle-wasting
diseases, but the sports applications are obvious.

   The therapy produces increased levels of IGF-1, an insulin-like growth factor
and a protein that promotes muscle growth and repair.

   Lab rats showed a 35% strength gain in targeted muscles and didn't lose any
of it when experiments at the University of Pennsylvania ceased.

   "I wouldn't be surprised if somebody (in sports) is trying it as we speak,"
University of Western Ontario genetics expert Dr. Shiva Singh said.

   INUNDATED WITH CALLS

   "If you can do it for a diseased muscle, why can't you do it for a normal
muscle?"

   The University of Pennsylvania's Lee Sweeney, chair of the physiology
department, says researchers have been inundated with calls from weightlifters
and body-builders. Even a high school football coach wanted his team treated. He
says it's an easy process for, say, a strengthened leg.

   "I would put the whole leg on bypass," he said. "I would isolate the leg and
put in the virus through the blood. This is nothing a vascular surgeon couldn't
do."

   Here's the scary part from the standpoint of those seeking to weed out the
cheats: It would be hard to detect. Gene therapy would not be detectable through
the normal tests -- blood, urine or saliva samples -- only through muscle
biopsies.

   Like steroids, gene therapy was designed for medical purposes. And, like
steroids, it opens the door for athletic abuse.

LOAD-DATE: July 26, 2004


                              195 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2004 Sun Media Corporation
                                The Toronto Sun

                       June 21, 2004 Monday Final Edition

SECTION: LIFESTYLE; Pg. 50

LENGTH: 786 words

HEADLINE: FEELING NO PAIN;
TODDLER SUFFERS FROM RARE NERVE DISORDER THAT CAN BE RUINOUS TO HER HEALTH

BYLINE: BY JOSHUA FREED, THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: ELK RIVER, Minn.

BODY:

   Gabby Gingras was about a day old when a nurse pricked her heel to draw blood
-- a sting that makes most newborns howl. Gabby slept through it.

   What a good baby, her parents thought.

   When Gabby teethed, she gnawed on her fingers until they were bloody. One
day, as her father massaged her gums with his finger, she bit him, hard. When he
reflexively yanked his finger back, one of Gabby's teeth came with it. She
didn't cry.

   When it comes to pain, she never does.

   An extremely rare nerve disorder called hereditary sensory autonomic
neuropathy Type 5 keeps pain sensations from reaching Gabby's brain. Gabby, now
3, simply does not feel injuries that would make others cry out.

   That might not sound so bad to anyone who has ever stubbed a toe. But it's
ruinous for Gabby's health.

   HOT STOVE

   Pain is what keeps a child from poking her finger straight into her eye, as
Gabby has done, repeatedly. Pain is why we limp to favour a twisted ankle, so it
can heal. Pain teaches children to recoil from a hot stove.

   She broke several teeth by chewing on plastic toys before her parents knew
what her condition was. The ones that didn't break were pulled or lost when
doctors removed part of a broken jaw that had been weakened by a bacterial
infection.

   As a toddler, Gabby poked and scratched her eyes, oblivious to the damage she
was doing. Her parents worked with her doctors, frantic to get her to stop.
Nothing worked until her father, ignoring a doctor who told him they wouldn't
work, bought a pair of ordinary swimming goggles.

   Gabby wears her "glasses" 24 hours a day, and her right eye has begun to heal
now that she keeps her fingers out of it.

   But the goggles were too late for her left eye. Cataracts ruined it, a
side-effect of medication Gabby took for the scratches on her cornea.

   Gabby's condition baffled her doctors before it was diagnosed.

   Her parents decided that they had just as good a chance of figuring out what
was wrong with her as her doctors did. Trish Gingras, an editor at a trade
journal before she quit her job after Gabby's birth, started her own Internet
search.

   BITTEN FINGERS, TONGUE

   She found an article in a dental journal about treating symptoms similar to
Gabby's. The children described in the article had bitten their fingers and
tongue, just like Gabby. It described five types of hereditary sensory autonomic
neuropathy. The first four included symptoms that Gabby didn't have, such as
mental retardation.

   Type 5, however, blocked pain sensation, but didn't cause mental retardation.
Type 5 sufferers also retain their other nerve senses -- heat, cold, vibration
and the ability to perceive movement, which is how you know your foot just
pressed on the gas pedal even though you can't see it.

   A nerve biopsy confirmed that Gabby, then just 12 months old, had HSAN Type
5.

   The condition is so rare that Dr. Peter Dyck, a neurologist at the Mayo
Clinic, estimates that 25 people in the U.S. have HSAN Type 5 -- taking into
account those who have not been diagnosed. Gabby's parents know of only one
other person in the U.S. who has it.

   There are no support groups, no how-to books for parents, little medical
research. And no cure.

   Keeping their children as healthy as possible is the only option for parents
of children with HSAN, Dyck said.

   In other ways, Gabby is like any other 3-year-old. She hops out of a
preschool minivan with purple paint smeared from her elbow to her wrist from a
butterfly she painted. She loves the Lion King movie and books. On request
she'll roar like Mufasa, or mimic Simba's soft growl.

   While playing with her 7-year-old sister, Katie, behind their house in rural
central Minnesota, she points out that the crossed chains of her swing look like
the letter X.

   Dyck said that perhaps someday HSAN can be cured through gene therapy, where
healthy genes would replace the mutated ones that cause the disease. But a
breakthrough, if there is one, could take decades.

   So Gabby's parents rarely let her out of their sight. Every fall brings a
thorough check of her knees, or an inspection for a cut or break that they might
not have noticed.

   The Gingrases recently visited another American HSAN patient, a 24-year-old
woman in Sioux Falls, S.D., who they said was the patient described by Dyck in
the 1983 article.

   The meeting finally allowed the Gingrases to compare notes with another
parent who had a child with the disease. But the meeting was difficult, too.

   The woman is in a wheelchair now, after losing both legs to knee infections
because as a girl she had hurt her knees but didn't know it. She lost her first
leg at age four.

   "It's discouraging," Steve Gingras said. "It's like seeing Gabby in a
wheelchair."

GRAPHIC: photospread; 4 photos by by Jim Mone, AP; 1. GABBY GINGRAS plays on a
swing in her backyard. ; 2. Gabby hugs big sister Katie, 7, as Katie arrives
home from school.; 3. GABBY'S FATHER, Steve Gingras, places drops in his
daughter's eyes. ; 4. Gabby has a break from wearing her goggles as dad reads
comics to her.

LOAD-DATE: June 21, 2004


                              198 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2004 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                       May 10, 2004 Monday Final Edition

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. A04

LENGTH: 643 words

HEADLINE: Mac prof sees SARS vaccine among gene therapy 'cures'; Science in City
lecture series concludes with future applications of genes as medicine

SOURCE: The Hamilton Spectator

BYLINE: Meredith Macleod

BODY:

   McMaster's Dr. Jack Gauldie will soon get the results of animal trials that
hold the promise of creating a SARS vaccine.

   That would mark a huge breakthrough in combating the deadly virus that killed
774 people last year, including 44 in Canada, and sickened thousands.

   But beyond infectious diseases like SARS, the research of Gauldie and others
working in gene therapeutics holds the potential for the true "cure" of a range
of genetic diseases.

   Gauldie, a pre-eminent gene researcher and director of McMaster University's
Centre for Gene Therapeutics, will talk about the vast new frontier of work
tomorrow night in a lecture called Genes as Medicine: From Growth Factors to
Vaccines.

   It's the last in a season of Science in the City lectures sponsored by
McMaster University and The Spectator.

   Gauldie will begin with a whirlwind tour of the basics of gene research: What
is a gene? How can it be isolated? How can we use genes to deliver medicine and
vaccines to an ailing body?

   Scientists know a whole lot about the sequencing of the human genetic code
and continue to identify new genes among the 30,000 found in humans. Researchers
understand how the human body can replicate genes placed into cells from outside
and then produce the necessary proteins to carry out the functions of the human
body.

   The problem is in the delivery. Finding the best way to get into the correct
cell and orienting the gene the right way so that it works permanently, is the
challenge, says Gauldie.

   "Right now we don't know how to do it easily, safely and so that it's easily
reproducible. We know how to get the gene from outside to inside the cell but
once inside it's not working as well as we would like it."

   Gauldie's work focuses on using the common cold virus -- adenovirus -- to
deliver vaccines. Since the virus easily makes its way into cells through the
nose, throat or lungs, researchers have found a way to "piggyback" a gene-based
vaccine onto the virus.

   "It's too dangerous to work with the SARS virus to develop a vaccine," said
Gauldie. "But we know the genes of the virus and have identified one of them
that is the code for the protein that sticks on the outside of the SARS virus.
It's called the spike protein."

   That's the gene that is injected into the common cold virus. In that way, the
SARS virus is crippled because it can't replicate itself. The SARS protein is
delivered into the cell, which triggers the body's immune system to start
fighting.

   "So now we have immunity without having the true virus."

   Gauldie expects to have the results of vaccine trials on mice and ferrets in
a couple of weeks.

   The same basic delivery principle can be adapted to a whole host of diseases
including cancer, diabetes, cystic fibrosis, arthritis, HIV, hemophilia,
hepatitis, respiratory problems and growth deficiencies.

   It's really cutting-edge stuff. Scientists have only known enough about the
human gene makeup for about 10 years. But Gauldie says it will only be 10 or 15
years before gene therapy is a commonly-used treatment.

   "Things go wrong when genes don't work right or they're working too hard or
there's too many or too few or they're in the wrong sequence. This is a new way
of treating disease at that level."

   Critics of gene-based medical research argue it's a slippery slope down from
manipulating genes to fight disease to human cloning or messing around with
human evolution.

   "We are so far away from that, that we can't even think about how to do
that," said Gauldie.

   Tomorrow's Science in the City lecture is free and open to the public. It
will be held in The Spectator auditorium, 44 Frid St. Doors open at 6:30 p.m.
and the talk begins at 7 p.m.

   To register for a seat, call 905-525-9140, ext. 24934, or send an e-mail to
sciencecity@mcmaster.ca.

   mmacleod@thespec.com 905-526-3408

LOAD-DATE: May 10, 2004


                              200 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2004 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                      April 26, 2004 Monday Final Edition

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 781 words

HEADLINE: Feeling no pain sounds good until it destroys your health

SOURCE: The Associated Press

BYLINE: Joshua Freed

DATELINE: ELK RIVER, MINN.

BODY:

   Gabby Gingras was about a day old when a nurse pricked her heel to draw blood
-- a sting that makes most newborns howl. Gabby slept through it.

   What a good baby, her parents thought.

   When Gabby teethed, she gnawed on her fingers until they were bloody. One
day, as her father massaged her gums with his finger, she bit him, hard. When he
yanked his finger back, one of Gabby's teeth came with it. She didn't cry.

   When it comes to pain, she never does.

   An extremely rare nerve disorder called hereditary sensory autonomic
neuropathy Type 5 keeps pain sensations from reaching Gabby's brain. Gabby, now
three, does not feel injuries that would make others cry out.

   That might not sound so bad to anyone who has ever stubbed a toe. But it's
ruinous for Gabby's health.

   Pain is what keeps a child from poking her finger straight into her eye, as
Gabby has done, repeatedly. Pain is why we limp to favour a twisted ankle, so it
can heal. Pain teaches children to recoil from a hot stove.

   When Gabby was teething, "she would chew on her fingers until they were
bloody," her dad, Steve Gingras, recalled. "She would chew on her tongue like
bubble gum."

   Without the pain that could prevent it, Gabby has injured herself over and
over. She broke several teeth by chewing on plastic toys before her parents knew
what her condition was. The teeth that didn't break were pulled or lost when
doctors removed part of a broken jaw that had been weakened by a bacterial
infection.

   As a toddler, Gabby poked and scratched her eyes, oblivious to the damage she
was doing. Her parents worked with her doctors, frantic to get her to stop.
Nothing worked until her father, ignoring a doctor who told him they wouldn't
work, bought swimming goggles.

   Gabby wears her "glasses" 24 hours a day, and her right eye has begun to heal
now that she keeps her fingers out of it.

   But the goggles were too late for her left eye. Cataracts ruined it, a
side-effect of medication Gabby took for the scratches on her cornea. It has
swelled to about twice the size of her right eye, where her vision has been
measured at 20-300.

   Gabby's condition baffled her doctors before it was diagnosed.

   As she continued to hurt herself during her first year, her parents decided
they had just as good a chance of figuring out what was wrong with her as her
doctors did. So, while Gabby visited neurologists, Trish Gingras, an editor at a
trade journal before she quit her job after Gabby's birth, started her own
Internet search for a name for her daughter's condition.

   She found an article in a dental journal about treating symptoms similar to
Gabby's. It described five types of hereditary sensory autonomic neuropathy.

   Type 5 sufferers retain their other nerve senses -- heat, cold, vibration and
the ability to perceive movement, which is how you know your foot just pressed
on the gas pedal even though you can't see it.

   A nerve biopsy confirmed that Gabby, then a year old, had HSAN Type 5. The
condition is so rare that Dr. Peter Dyck, a neurologist at the Mayo Clinic,
estimates 25 people in the U.S. have HSAN Type 5 -- taking into account those
who have not been diagnosed. Gabby's parents know of only one other person in
the U.S. who has it.

   There are no support groups, no how-to books for parents, little medical
data. And no cure.

   Keeping their children as healthy as possible is the only option for parents
of children with HSAN, Dyck said, who was part of a team that classified the
five types of HSAN in 1983. One girl he studied held her hand on a hot stove
until her mother smelled the burning flesh and removed it. The same girl poked a
pencil through her cheek.

   In other ways, Gabby is like any other three-year-old.

   Dyck said that perhaps someday HSAN can be cured through gene therapy, where
healthy genes would replace the mutated ones that cause the disease. But a
breakthrough, if there is one, could take decades.

   So Gabby's parents rarely let her out of their sight. Every fall brings a
thorough check of her knees, or an inspection for a cut or break that they might
not have noticed.

   The family recently visited another American HSAN patient, a 24-year-old
woman in Sioux Falls, S.D., who they said was the patient described by Dyck in
the 1983 article.

   The meeting finally allowed the them to compare notes with another parent who
had a child with the disease. But the meeting was difficult, too.

   The woman is in a wheelchair after losing both legs to knee infections
because as a girl she hurt her knees but didn't know it. She lost her first leg
at four.

   "It's discouraging," Steve Gingras said. "It's like seeing Gabby in a
wheelchair."

GRAPHIC: Photo: Jim Mone, the Associated Press; Gabby Gingras wears swimmers'
goggles to protect her eyes.

LOAD-DATE: April 26, 2004


                              202 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2004 Sun Media Corporation
                         Edmonton Sun (Alberta, Canada)

                     April 22, 2004 Thursday Final Edition

SECTION: LIFESTYLE; Pg. 56

LENGTH: 477 words

HEADLINE: FEELING NO PAIN;
RARE DISORDER HAS TODDLER CONSTANTLY INJURING HERSELF

BYLINE: BY JOSHUA FREED, THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: ELK RIVER, Minnesota

BODY:

   Gabby Gingras was about a day old when a nurse pricked her heel to draw blood
- a sting that makes most newborns howl. Gabby slept through it.

   What a good baby, her parents thought.

   When Gabby teethed, she gnawed on her fingers until they were bloody. One
day, as her father massaged her gums with his finger, she bit him, hard. When he
reflexively yanked his finger back, one of Gabby's teeth came with it. She
didn't cry.

   When it comes to pain, she never does.

   An extremely rare nerve disorder called hereditary sensory autonomic
neuropathy Type 5 keeps pain sensations from reaching Gabby's brain. Gabby, now
3, simply does not feel injuries that would make others cry out.

   That might not sound so bad to anyone who has ever stubbed a toe. But it's
ruinous for Gabby's health.

   Pain is what keeps a child from poking her finger straight into her eye, as
Gabby has done repeatedly. Pain is why we limp to favour a twisted ankle, so it
can heal. Pain teaches children to recoil from a hot stove.

   When Gabby was teething, "she would chew on her fingers until they were
bloody," her father, Steve Gingras, recalled.

   She broke several teeth by chewing on plastic toys before her parents knew
what her condition was. The ones that didn't break were pulled or lost when
doctors removed part of a broken jaw that had been weakened by a bacterial
infection.

   As a toddler, Gabby poked and scratched her eyes, oblivious to the damage she
was doing. Her parents worked with her doctors, frantic to get her to stop.
Nothing worked until her father, ignoring a doctor who told him they wouldn't
work, bought a pair of ordinary swimming goggles.

   Gabby wears her "glasses" 24 hours a day, and her right eye has begun to heal
now that she keeps her fingers out of it.

   But the goggles were too late for her left eye. Cataracts ruined it, a
side-effect of medication Gabby took for the scratches on her cornea. It has
swelled to about twice the size of her right eye.

   Gabby's condition baffled her doctors before it was diagnosed. A nerve biopsy
confirmed that Gabby, then just 12 months old, had HSAN Type 5. Her parents
finally knew why their daughter was hurting herself.

   The condition is so rare that Dr. Peter Dyck, a neurologist at the Mayo
Clinic, estimates that 25 people in the United States have HSAN Type 5 - taking
into account those who have not been diagnosed. Gabby's parents know of only one
other person in the U.S. who has it.

   There are no support groups, no how-to books for parents, little medical
research. And no cure.

   Keeping their children as healthy as possible is the only option for parents
of children with HSAN, Dyck said.

   Dyck said that perhaps some day HSAN can be cured through gene therapy, where
healthy genes would replace the mutated ones that cause the disease. But a
breakthrough, if there is one, could take decades.

GRAPHIC: photo by AP; Gabby Gingras enjoys a springtime swing in her backyard in
Elk River, Minnesota. The three-year-old has a nerve disorder that keeps pain
sensations from reaching her brain. Her dad gave her goggles to prevent her from
poking and scratching her eyes.

LOAD-DATE: April 22, 2004


                              204 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2004 Sun Media Corporation
                         Edmonton Sun (Alberta, Canada)

                      April 18, 2004 Sunday Final Edition

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. SP2Today in Sports

LENGTH: 273 words

HEADLINE: ATHLETES, COACHES WILL TURN TO GENE DOPING

BYLINE: BY AP

DATELINE: UTRECHT, Netherlands

BODY:

   Experts believe athletes and coaches will soon turn to gene doping, hoping to
gain a performance edge.

   Authorities told a workshop on gene doping yesterday that recent discoveries
have made it inevitable that athletes and coaches will try to abuse gene therapy
to gain an edge in speed, strength or endurance - despite huge health risks.

   "I'm very pessimistic - I think it won't take very long," said Hidde Haisma,
a professor of gene therapy at the University of Groningen.

   The needed tools "are available at labs around the world," he said.

   Though the idea of manipulating genes to enhance performance has been around
for more than a decade, it gained attention this year after a University of
Pennsylvania study showed that muscle mass, strength and endurance in rats can
be increased by altering their genes.

   Scientists have treated roughly 3,000 humans suffering from life-threatening
illnesses with gene therapy, but few cases have been successful, with some
fatal.

   In one non-human study where monkeys' genes were manipulated to produce an
extra protein called erythropoietin, some of the monkeys developed anemia.

   Given the risks involved, the first gene doping in the sports world may be in
an animal sport like dog racing, Haisma said.

   But Olivier Rabin, science director at the World Anti-Doping Agency, said
athletes began using new steroids "straight from the test tube, before they were
even tested on animals."

   Current blood and urine tests cannot detect gene doping, and Haisma said the
most promising technique of detection involved analysing the proteins in blood
samples, looking for a suspicious spike.

LOAD-DATE: April 20, 2004


                              205 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2004 Sun Media Corporation
                                The Toronto Sun

                      April 18, 2004 Sunday Final Edition

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. SP13

LENGTH: 314 words

HEADLINE: GENE, GENE THE SPORTS MACHINE;
HEALTH RISKS WON'T DETER ATHLETES, COACHES, EXPERTS WARN

BYLINE: BY AP

BODY:

   EXPERTS BELIEVE athletes and coaches will soon turn to gene doping in an
attempt to gain a performance edge.

   Authorities told a workshop on gene doping, held at Utrecht in The
Netherlands yesterday that recent discoveries have made it inevitable that
athletes and coaches will try to abuse gene therapy to gain an edge in speed,
strength or endurance -- and do so despite huge health risks.

   "I'm very pessimistic. I think it won't take very long," said Hidde Haisma, a
professor of gene therapy at the University of Groningen.

   The needed tools "are available at labs around the world," he said.

   Though the idea of manipulating genes to enhance performance has been around
for more than a decade, it gained attention this year after a University of
Pennsylvania study showed that muscle mass, strength and endurance in rats can
be increased by altering their genes.

   Scientists have treated roughly 3,000 humans suffering from life-threatening
illnesses with gene therapy, but few cases have been successful and some have
been fatal.

   In one non-human study where monkeys' genes were manipulated to produce an
extra protein called erythropoietin, some of the monkeys developed the disease
anemia.

   Given the risks involved, the first gene doping in the sports world may be in
an animal sport like dog racing, Haisma said.

   But Olivier Rabin, science director at the World Anti-Doping Agency, said
human athletes won't wait long. He pointed to instances when athletes began
using new steroids "straight from the test tube, before they were even tested on
animals."

   Current blood and urine tests cannot detect gene doping, and Haisma said the
most promising technique of detection involved analyzing the proteins in blood
samples, looking for a suspicious spike.

   "There is no doubt in the minds of people working in the sports community
that gene doping is coming," he said.

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 2004


                              207 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2004 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                     April 7, 2004 Wednesday Final Edition

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. A10

LENGTH: 516 words

HEADLINE: City at centre of bid for national health agency

SOURCE: The Hamilton Spectator

BYLINE: Paul Morse

BODY:

   Ontario wants the federal government to build its new national public health
agency in the "health research triangle" of Hamilton, Guelph and Toronto.

   Ottawa is expected to announce its decision within weeks.

   McMaster University yesterday pledged $10 million to help build a facility in
Hamilton if Ottawa picks the Golden Horseshoe.

   The province launched its tri-city bid, a late entry in the intense
single-site lobbying battle being waged by Vancouver, Edmonton and Winnipeg, at
McMaster University's Health Sciences Centre yesterday.

   Similar announcements were held in Toronto and Guelph.

   The Queen's Park bid focuses on Hamilton as a key player for the
half-billion-dollar agency, similar to the Centers for Disease Control in the
U.S., as part of a national nodal agency network. Vancouver wants the whole
agency in one facility.

   Dalton McGuinty's government has not put any money on the table, unlike B.C.
which has pledged $100 million to bring the agency to Vancouver.

   Yesterday, Hamilton MPP and cabinet minister Marie Bountrogianni said, "We
spent $30 billion a year at hospitals, more than any other province in
investments in hospitals. We feel that, in conjunction with the critical mass
(of the research triangle), is more than sufficient."

   Bountrogianni added Queen's Park has not yet shut the door on money for the
centre. The provincial plan, called the Golden Horseshoe Public Health
Initiative, calls for the centre's headquarters to be in Ottawa, but the
majority of research, medical and public health work to be done in Hamilton and
Guelph.

   "What we're realizing, for our city, our region and our university is that we
must have a significant component" of the Canada Public Health Agency, said Dr.
John Kelton, dean and vice-president of McMaster's faculty of health sciences.

   Mayor Larry Di Ianni and Kelton want Hamilton to become the main provincial
and national agency node.

   "It would be built ideally downtown, near the campus or near the airport,"
Kelton said.

   The facility would house experts who monitor infections, rapid response teams
and large numbers of nurses, while the universities would do most of the
research for them.

   Kelton said Ontario has recently dealt with SARS, West Nile virus and
contaminated water at Walkerton.

   University officials and local politicians argue the new agency should be
brought here because Hamilton has a critical mass of scientists with expertise
in infectious diseases, microbiology and public health.

   Kelton said, "We've got one of the strongest vaccine groups in the country
and a level 3 laboratory at the university, which means we can handle very
serious infectious diseases."

   For example, when B.C. researchers decoded the SARS virus, they asked Dr.
Jack Gauldie, director of McMaster's Centre for Gene Therapeutics, to develop a
vaccine. It's now being tested on animals.

   "They didn't go to the CDC in Atlanta, they came here," Kelton said. "There
is a race around the world to make the SARS vaccine and we hope we're first."

   pmorse@thespec.com 905-526-3434

GRAPHIC: Photo: Hamilton Spectator File Photos; Marie Bountrogianni says Queen's
Park may fund the centre.; Photo: John Kelton says Mac has the required
facilities.

LOAD-DATE: April 7, 2004


                              210 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2004 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                   February 25, 2004 Wednesday Final Edition

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. A07

LENGTH: 657 words

HEADLINE: Mac makes case for disease control centre; Says Hamilton ideal
location for Canada's first monitoring facility

SOURCE: The Hamilton Spectator

BYLINE: Suzanne Morrison

BODY:

   McMaster University is lobbying to have Canada's first centre for disease
control and prevention based in Hamilton.

   Dr. John Kelton, dean and vice-president of McMaster's faculty of health
sciences, said initiatives have been under way with provincial and federal
officials since last spring.

   Kelton said yesterday both Hamilton and McMaster are well-positioned for such
a centre that would monitor diseases such as West Nile and SARS, develop
policies for preventing diseases, and work towards maintaining public health.

   Discussions have been held within the last three weeks with Dr. Carolyn
Bennett, minister of state (public health), who will decide where the centre --
modeled on the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention -- is located in
Canada.

   Revenue Minister and Hamilton West MP Stan Keyes, whose riding contains
McMaster, confirmed "there's been a lot of activity on the file." He and
Transport Minister Tony Valeri have organized meetings for McMaster officials
with former health minister Anne McLellan and Health Canada officials.

   Keyes added, however, the process of finding a site "is in information mode"
and he could not say when it would end.

   As recently as Monday, McMaster and local public health officials had a
two-hour meeting with Health Minister George Smitherman explaining why McMaster
and Hamilton are a logical choice.

   McLellan, as health minister, gave the first hint last August the federal
government is moving closer to creating a national disease control centre.
Earlier this month, the government's philosophical commitment to such an agency
was reinforced in the throne speech.

   Canada's disease control work today is split between Winnipeg and Ottawa,
with scientific research at Winnipeg's National Microbiology Lab, and public
health addressed by Ottawa's Centre for Infectious Disease Prevention and
Control.

   Kelton, Keyes and others say there are important reasons why both levels of
government should consider Hamilton.

   A strong partnership has been developed between McMaster -- with strengths in
public health, public education and human infections -- and the University of
Guelph, whose strength is animal infectious diseases. For example,
micro-organisms infecting animals identified in laboratories at Guelph are being
sent to McMaster.

   "We have clarified exactly what the species were and developed techniques for
finding the antibiotics for treating them. That has been a big success and is
now routine," Kelton said.

   Dr. Jack Gauldie, director of McMaster's Centre for Gene Therapeutics, is
testing viral cancer treatments he's developed on animals at the University of
Guelph.

   "It's possible we will be able to use some of the same breakthroughs we are
seeing in animals in humans," Kelton said.

   Mac researchers are also making headway on the development of a SARS vaccine.
The university is also putting $10 million of its $105 million DeGroote fund
into infectious disease and establishing two research chairs on infectious
diseases and public health.

   "It is a signal of how remarkably serious we are in these discussions,"
Kelton said.

   Infectious diseases specialist Dr. Mark Loeb said, "The expertise at McMaster
is just outstanding. This is the place that gave birth to evidence-based
medicine ... nowhere else in the country do you have the concentration of people
in one spot who work well together ... not only to create knowledge but have the
expertise in the dissemination of knowledge. We write the rules on this."

   McMaster's push coincides with a visit by Dr. Julie Gerberding, director of
the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta. Tonight, she
will give the Redman Lecture at McMaster, a presentation called Twenty-first
Century Health Threats: Preparedness in a Small World. She'll also hold a news
conference at McMaster. Bennett will also be there.

   smorrison@thespec.com

   905-526-3474

LOAD-DATE: February 25, 2004


                              211 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2004 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                    February 19, 2004 Thursday Final Edition

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 724 words

HEADLINE: Therapy slows muscular dystrophy; MEDICAL BREAKTHROUGH; Quebec tests
offer hope of treatment

SOURCE: The Canadian Press

BYLINE: Helen Branswell

DATELINE: TORONTO

BODY:

   A tiny clinical trial by Quebec researchers is raising hopes of a first real
treatment for a heartbreaking condition known as Duchenne muscular dystrophy.
This hereditary disease weakens muscles and eventually causes death in afflicted
boys.

   Researchers from Laval University in Quebec City, led by Dr. Jacques
Tremblay, have shown they are able to induce muscles in Duchenne patients to
produce dystrophin, the protein they are missing.

   Lack of dystrophin causes their muscles to tear easily, eventually exhausting
the muscles' ability to repair themselves.

   Duchenne's sufferers are often confined to a wheelchair by their early teens.
The average life expectancy is 17 to 23 years.

   "This is a very significant step forward," said George Henderson, national
communications manager for Muscular Dystrophy Canada, in an interview yesterday.

   "It is a long way ... from broad-based treatment. But certainly it is the
first treatment and the clinical trial has been positive."

   A Toronto physician who treats patients with Duchenne muscular dystrophy said
the findings, based on three patients, were "a very important first step."

   "It's been tried before and didn't work," said Dr. Douglas Biggar, a
specialist in pediatric rehabilitation at the Bloorview MacMillan Centre. "And
Tremblay's come up with some clever ideas of maybe how it should work. So if you
can get it to work in three or four, that's significant."

   A report on the work was published in Molecular Therapy, the journal of the
American Society for Gene Therapy.

   Duchenne muscular dystrophy afflicts about one in every 3,500 boys worldwide
and is caused by a mutation on the gene programmed to produce dystrophin.

   It's a devastating disease. Sufferers lose muscle function, eventually dying
of respiratory difficulties or heart disease. Parents watch their sons die --
slowly.

   "When you're playing beat the clock with your son ... you almost feel like
grasping at everything and anything. And sure, anything that comes up is very
promising," said Steve Micallef, of Toronto, when he heard of Tremblay's
success.

   Micallef's 16-year-old son, Zachary, has Duchenne MD. Micallef said he
believes his son will beat the odds, but he knows that with medical advances,
the time from headline to available treatment is not short.

   "That's the downer part. That's the low blow."

   Tremblay and his team transplanted cells called myoblasts from healthy
relatives of three patients and injected them into muscle tissue of their
subjects.

   Myoblasts are the cells that normally repair damaged muscles. Myoblasts from
the healthy donors produce dystrophin.

   And a month after the cells were injected into the Duchenne patients, muscle
biopsies showed in the area of the injection, dystrophin was being produced.

   "It's doing what it should be doing. It's good news," Tremblay said in a
telephone interview.

   Health Canada had given Tremblay permission to try the technique in 10
patients in this first phase of the research, called a proof-of-principle trial.
But the team was able to prove the concept in three.

   "If we would have done the study and done the 10 patients already and got
three that had these results, we would have been happy. The first three got the
results. We are happy."

   The trial could not determine whether the treatment improved muscle strength.
But based on the initial success, Health Canada has approved a second phase,
which is designed to see if it does.

   At this point Tremblay's goals might seem modest to a healthy individual. He
knows for Duchenne sufferers, they are not.

   "Initially our aim is to increase the strength of a few muscles which are
significant for the patient. If we increase the strength of their arm muscles so
that they can eat food by themselves, if they can control their electric
wheelchair, if they can turn the page of a book, the patient's going to be happy
with that."

   The treatment isn't likely to be a full cure. Treatment would require
multiple injections in every muscle targeted. But if it works, it will be a
treatment, an additional weapon in a slight arsenal that only contains
corticosteroids used to slow the onslaught of the disease.

   "We want to report positive results because it gives families some hope,"
Tremblay said. "But of course, I also don't want to give false hopes."

LOAD-DATE: February 19, 2004


                              218 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2003 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                     October 2, 2003 Thursday Final Edition

SECTION: LOCAL NEWS; Pg. A08

LENGTH: 523 words

HEADLINE: Mac team making headway on possible SARS vaccine; Coming trials on
mice should prove if antibody response theory is workable

SOURCE: The Hamilton Spectator

BYLINE: Suzanne Morrison

BODY:

   Researchers at McMaster University appear to be leading the global race to
develop a vaccine against SARS.

   Their position as front-runners is the result of a discovery by Dr. Jim
Mahony, who successfully cloned the gene that marks the nucleocapsid protein of
the virus for SARS -- severe acute respiratory syndrome.

   "This is very important because if you look at the serum (blood) from
patients infected with SARS, they all have a strong antibody response to this
protein," said Mahony, head of the regional virology program at St. Joseph's
Healthcare.

   By purifying the nucleocapsid protein, Mahony believes, it may be possible to
use it as a vaccine against SARS.

   "We know when you are infected with SARS that you make a large amount of
antibodies to this protein," he said. "We are hoping the antibodies that are
made will neutralize (kill) the virus."

   A vaccine tries to do the same thing our bodies do when we catch an
infection. When we are infected with a virus or bacterium, our bodies make
antibodies, which are proteins in our blood that neutralize the infection. The
presence of these circulating antibodies is crucial for combating all diseases.

   Mahony and the McMaster research team have also discovered a second protein,
called the spike protein -- which sticks out of the SARS virus like a spike.
They believe it, too, could potentially be developed into a second SARS vaccine.

   In experiments that get under way next week, researchers will start injecting
mice with both proteins, then measure the abilities of antibodies to kill SARS.

   "If the mice make antibodies to these two proteins, and the antibodies kill
the virus, these would be very good vaccine candidates that we could purify and
inject into humans," Mahony said.

   Trials in monkeys are expected to begin within the next three months and
human trials in six months.

   The ultimate goal, a SARS vaccine, is at least two years away.

   The advances made by the McMaster researchers are good news, said Dr.
Bhagirath Singh, scientific director of the Institute of Infection and Immunity
at the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR).

   CIHR is funding the team's work and Singh said he finds it "really exciting
that it is paying off."

   The McMaster research team is headed by Dr. Jack Gauldie, chair of the
department of pathology and molecular medicine who is also director of the
Centre for Gene Therapeutics. Along with Mahony, the team includes Frank Graham,
Mary Hitt, Ludvik Prevec and Uma Sankar.

   Gauldie said eight or nine labs across Canada are involved in various stages
of developing a vaccine.

   "We think we are ahead of other groups," he said. "We know other people are
doing this. Do they have exactly what we have got? Who knows? Don't think so."

   Mahony built his discovery on the findings of the British Columbia Centre for
Disease Control and its DNA sequence data identified in the spring.

   Infectious disease specialist Dr. Mark Loeb, director of the Canadian SARS
Research Network, said the discovery is an excellent next step in the
development of a SARS vaccine.

   smorrison@thespec.com 905-526-3474

GRAPHIC: Photo: Scott Gardner, the Hamilton Spectator; Dr. Jack Gauldie, left,
Dr. Jim Mahony and Uma Sankar are part of a team at McMaster University that is
closing in on the discovery of a possible vaccine for SARS, or severe acute
respiratory syndrome.

LOAD-DATE: October 2, 2003


                              226 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2003 Sun Media Corporation
                                The Toronto Sun

                     August 9, 2003 Saturday Final Edition

SECTION: LIFESTYLE; Pg. 34

LENGTH: 145 words

HEADLINE: NEW HOPE OF CURE FOR LOU GEHRIG'S DISEASE

BYLINE: BY AP

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   A new type of gene therapy doubled the life of mice with a laboratory form of
Lou Gehrig's disease and researchers said they are planning to test the
technique on human patients.

   In a study published this week in the journal Science, researchers at the
Salk Institute for Biological Studies in La Jolla, Calif. and Johns Hopkins
University in Baltimore report that injecting mice with a gene that makes a
nerve cell stimulating protein delayed symptoms of Lou Gehrig's disease and
extended the life span in laboratory mice.

   The gene makes a molecule called insulin like growth factor, or IGF-1, a type
of protein that has produced marginal results against Lou Gehrig's disease in
human clinical trials.

   More study is needed before the gene therapy can be used in humans, but
researchers say they were in the planning stages for human trials of the
treatment.

LOAD-DATE: August 9, 2003


                              227 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2003 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                      August 8, 2003 Friday Final Edition

SECTION: CANADA & WORLD; Pg. C02

LENGTH: 244 words

HEADLINE: Positive ALS tests on mice to be used on humans

SOURCE: The Associated Press

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   A new type of gene therapy doubled the life of mice with a laboratory form of
Lou Gehrig's disease and researchers said they are planning to test the
technique on human patients.

   In a study published this week in the journal Science, researchers at the
Salk Institute for Biological Studies in La Jolla, Calif., and Johns Hopkins
University in Baltimore report that injecting mice with a gene that makes a
nerve cell stimulating protein delayed symptoms of Lou Gehrig's disease and
extended the life span in laboratory mice.

   The gene makes a molecule called insulin-like growth factor, or IGF-1, a type
of protein that has produced marginal results against Lou Gehrig's disease in
human clinical trials.

   By delivering the IGF-1 gene directly into muscle tissue, researchers found
that nerve cells were preserved and muscle wasting was reduced in mice with a
laboratory form of the disease.

   Lou Gehrig's disease, or amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, causes the gradual
death of nerve cells that control muscle movement, resulting eventually in
paralysis and death. Its cause is unknown and there is no cure. ALS attracted
worldwide attention when New York Yankee first baseman Lou Gehrig announced that
he had the disease in 1939, two years before his death. ALS affects about 30,000
Americans.

   More study is needed before the gene therapy can be used in humans, but
researchers say they were in the planning stages for human trials of the
treatment.

LOAD-DATE: August 8, 2003


                              228 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2003 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                      July 29, 2003 Tuesday Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A06

LENGTH: 597 words

HEADLINE: Daring to dream of walking again; McMaster research focuses on nerve
cell transplant

SOURCE: The Hamilton Spectator

BYLINE: Suzanne Morrison

BODY:

   Today's scientific advances are leading to the possibility patients with
spinal cord injuries may one day walk again.

   At McMaster University, neurologist Dr. Michel Rathbone's laboratory --
considered the Canadian pacesetter in working on a cure for paralysis -- is
involved in research on removing healthy nerve cells from the stomach and
transplanting them into a damaged spinal cord, a procedure known as enteral
neural transplantation.

   Rathbone hopes the procedure may restore some function so the brain and lower
spinal cord are reconnected.

   Hamilton surgeon Dr. Robert Hansebout has put 13 years of research into a
promising experimental treatment for spinal cord injuries called Fampridine-SR
(4-AP).

   The drug is now in phase three clinical trials, the final stage of confirming
whether it is safe and effective for long-term use. If the results are as
positive as Hansebout hopes, it could help some patients who have lost the use
of their limbs regain some functions.

   This week, former Superman movie star Christopher Reeve, paralysed from the
neck down in a 1995 horseback riding accident, is in Israel studying the
country's treatment of spinal injuries and furthering his campaign for stem cell
research.

   Israel is a major centre for stem cell study, championed by Reeve as offering
hope for spinal cord patients.

   The issue of spinal cord injuries hit the headlines again last week when
Brantford police officer Cy Villa fell 4.5 metres over a concrete embankment and
landed face down in about a foot of water on a concrete pad. He had been chasing
a suspect reported to be posing as an officer and flashing a gun.

   Villa's spinal cord was torn and his fifth and sixth vertebrae broken.

   The spinal cord is the communication highway between the brain and the rest
of the body. When the spinal cord is injured, the exchange of information
between the brain and other parts of the body is disrupted.

   The Christopher Reeve Paralysis Foundation says perceptions about the spinal
cord have undergone a revolution in recent years. What was once considered
immutable is now showing signs of promise, a view shared by Ray Wickson,
director of research for the Canadian Spinal Research Organization (CSRO).

   There's a lot of scientific research going on out there and it's reversing
paralysis, he said. "Science in the last 10 to 15 years has made enormous
strides in the area of returning function to people who are paralysed."

   For years, CSRO has pursued bringing Fampridine-SR -- Hansebout's research
drug -- to spinal cord patients.

   While work began in the United States, the first human trials were conducted
in Canada, led by Hansebout at St. Joseph's Healthcare and Dr. Keith Hayes at
Parkwood Hospital in London. Fampridine-SR is the first drug to show promise in
restoring some neurological function to people with spinal cord injuries while
reducing stiffness and spasticity, increasing bladder and bowel control and
sexual function.

   Along with gene therapy, CSRO is also investigating a protein known as L1
that plays a role in the regeneration of nerves, with research working towards a
soluble form that could be developed as a drug.

   Wickson said Rathbone's work at McMaster "is crucially important."

   "To be able to get neurons to grow back in the spinal cord is massively
important because when a neuron in a cell dies in the central nervous system,
that's basically it," he said. "If you can introduce new neurons that are
grafted in that can control function, that's everything."

   smorrison@thespec.com or 905- 526-3474.

GRAPHIC: Photo: Special to the Hamilton Spectator; Injured Brantford policeman
Cy Villa with his wife and daughter before his back was broken chasing a
suspect.

LOAD-DATE: July 29, 2003


                              230 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2003 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                       July 11, 2003 Friday Final Edition

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. C04

LENGTH: 586 words

HEADLINE: Briefly

SOURCE: Spectator wire services

BODY:

   Anorexia rare in blacks

   The eating disorder anorexia nervosa, which has been studied mostly in white
women, appears to be extremely rare among black women in the United States.
Results from a study involving 2,046 women, more than half of them black, were
striking.

   "In our sample of more than 1,000 black women (ages 19-24), no case of
anorexia nervosa was detected, and the odds of detecting bulimia nervosa were
six-fold greater for white women than for black women," the researchers
concluded in a paper published this month in the American Journal of Psychiatry.

   Binge eating was the only eating disorder for which white and black women had
somewhat comparable rates: 27 out of a sample of 985 white women and 15 out of a
sample of 1,061 black women.

   There was a slightly higher risk of obesity among binge eaters, although the
relative youth of the volunteers prevented the researches from drawing long-term
conclusions about health effects. The risk of binge eating may rise with age,
said the team of researchers from Wesleyan University and elsewhere.

   The study did not examine the risk of eating disorders in other ethnic
groups, such as Asian, Latina or Native American women.

   Muscular dystrophy therapy

   A new approach to correcting the genetic defect that causes muscular
dystrophy shows promise in mice, though it is a long way from use in people.

   Scientists had been hoping to treat muscular dystrophy with gene therapy, an
experimental approach in which healthy copies of a gene are given to patients
who inherited faulty copies. But the gene that is broken in muscular dystrophy
is very large, making it difficult to deliver to muscle cells, where the gene
does its work of producing a muscle protein called dystrophin.

   The new approach, known as antisense technology, takes a different tack.
Researchers knew that children with muscular dystrophy have a mostly intact
version of the dystrophin gene. Just a small portion of the gene is damaged, but
it is enough to cause problems when muscle cells try to read its code.

   So instead of delivering entire replacement genes, researchers in England and
Australia decided to patch up the damaged ones by injecting antisense strands of
genetic material that bridge the damaged region.

   When the antisense strands were injected into the leg muscles of mice with
muscular dystrophy, the genes began producing near-normal dystrophin protein,
and the muscles regained strength.

   Now the team is looking for ways to get the antisense strands into muscle
cells more efficiently, so they might make a clinical difference in large human
muscles. The research appears in Sunday's advance online issue of the journal
Nature Medicine.

   Moon guides dung beetles

   Moonlight dreamily lights the way for poets, lovers -- and African dung
beetles trying to roll choice dung balls away from hungry competitors.

   The beetles are the first animals known to navigate by the polarization of
moonlight. Many creatures find their way using polarized sunlight, created, like
polarized moonlight, when light strikes atmospheric particles.

   Marie Dacke, of the University of Lund in Sweden, and colleagues placed some
of the beetles in an arena with a pile of fresh dung. Under moonlight, the
beetles industriously rolled their dung balls away in a straight line; but with
the moonlight blocked by a filter, the beetles grew utterly confused and pushed
their balls around wildly, the scientists wrote last week in Nature.

   Spectator wire services

LOAD-DATE: July 11, 2003


                              233 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2003 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                       June 6, 2003 Friday Final Edition

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. C04

LENGTH: 413 words

HEADLINE: Briefly

SOURCE: The Hamilton Spectator

BODY:

   Chimps share human trait

   DALLAS -- A new study shows that baby chimpanzees share a feature with baby
humans that implies speech must have evolved in two steps rather than one.

   The larynx, or voice box, is positioned lower in people than in other
animals, enabling the complicated acoustics of human speech. Scientists from
Japan have now shown that the larynx in baby chimps drops down early in infancy
-- a trait once thought unique to humans. The researchers used magnetic
resonance imaging to study the heads and necks of three chimpanzees as they grew
up.

   In people, the hyoid -- a U-shaped bone in the neck -- must drop after the
larynx in a second step that permits speech, the researchers reported last week
in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.

   Eclipse dims star for 3 1/2 years

   NASHVILLE -- Astronomers have reported the longest eclipse ever observed, but
they don't know what did it. HMW15, a star in the constellation Perseus, grew
dimmer and then returned to its original brightness over a period of three and a
half years, according to measurements analysed by Roger Cohen, an undergraduate
student at Wesleyan University in Middletown, Conn. Something apparently passed
in front of the star during that period, about a year longer than any previously
recorded eclipse. The identity of the eclipsing object is unknown, Wesleyan
professor William Herbst said in announcing the finding in Nashville last week
at a meeting of the American Astronomical Society.

   "We don't know exactly what it is," Herbst said, but he speculated that it
might be a massive dust cloud.

   Scientists grow new hair cells

   CHICAGO -- Michigan scientists have grown new hair cells in the inner ear of
adult guinea pigs, a finding that may eventually lead to new treatments for
hearing loss. More than 30 million North Americans have hearing loss because the
tiny hairs of the cochlea have become lost or damaged from infection, excessive
noise, aging or other factors. The vibrations of these hairs transmit sounds to
the brain. Once lost, these hairs never grow back.

   In an experiment described in the current issue of the Journal of
Neuroscience, researchers from the University of Michigan used gene therapy to
prompt hair growth in the cochlea. The scientists used a gene called Math 1.
During development, cells that make use of Math 1 are triggered to become hair
cells. But researchers do not know whether adult cells could be reprogrammed.

LOAD-DATE: June 6, 2003


                              235 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2003 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                      May 24, 2003 Saturday Final Edition

SECTION: MAGAZINE; Pg. M08

LENGTH: 571 words

HEADLINE: Scientist unravels DNA's complexity

SOURCE: The Baltimore Sun

BYLINE: Reviewed by Michael Stroh

BODY:

   DNA: The Secret of Life

   By James D. Watson

   Knopf, $59.95

   Fifty years ago, deoxyribonucleic acid was just one of the human body's many
obscure chemicals, a substance of interest to only a tiny handful of scientists
around the world.

   And even they weren't sure what to make of it.

   Today, of course, that's all changed. DNA is a cultural and scientific
superstar, its curvy profile plastered on everything from billboards to business
cards.

   The molecule is used to solve crimes, head off disease, design hardier crops
and probe the origins of our species.

   The complex story of DNA's journey out of scientific obscurity, and the
social upheaval it has occasionally created along the way, has been the subject
of numerous books and articles over the years. But now biologist James Watson,
one of the scientists who brought DNA to the fore, has produced a single-volume
coffee-table history that is both lavishly illustrated and engagingly told. In
February 1953 Watson and his research partner Francis Crick solved the
long-standing mystery of DNA's structure by determining its atoms were strung
together like a winding spiral staircase, or double helix. It was a discovery
with profound implications, as the pair quickly realized.

   Soon after the insight, Watson recalls, he and Crick bounced into a nearby
Cambridge University pub where Crick boomed: We have discovered the secret of
life! While memories of what exactly was said that day differ, the Nobel
Committee ultimately agreed with the spirit of Watson's portrayal, awarding the
pair the prize in 1962 for their monumental discovery.

   It's a story recounted in Watson's best-selling memoir, The Double Helix, and
repeated here, lending the book its subtitle. But Watson spends most of his time
chronicling what has happened to DNA in the years since: how the discovery of
DNA's structure led to an understanding of how the molecule stores and passes on
hereditary information and ultimately how it made it possible for scientists to
tinker with the molecule. Much of the material in the book, written with
Harvard-trained geneticist Andrew Berry, seems to have been assembled from other
sources. But what elevates this history above Cliff's Notes status is Watson
himself, who at 75 is widely regarded as the dean of DNA, the elder statesman of
molecular biology.

   Watson's understanding of the science -- he's also written some of the
field's standard textbooks -- and his personal acquaintance with many of the
researchers he mentions lends his account an authority that would be hard to
match. His quirky sense of humour and habit of tossing in gossipy,
behind-the-scenes asides don't hurt, either.

   Watson also doesn't gloss over controversies that have surrounded DNA over
the years, such as the development and occasionally unintended spread of
genetically modified food and failures of gene therapy, which in 1999 killed a
teen-age study subject.

   Not surprisingly, the scientist argues that setbacks like this are tragic but
inevitable and shouldn't be used to shut down risky research.

   More knowledge, not less, is always better in the long run, Watson believes.

   The book's publication is timed to coincide with the 50th anniversary of his
and Crick's discovery. For anybody who has felt bewildered by DNA-related
headlines and wondered how we were able to come so far so fast, this book offers
the perfect way to catch up.

GRAPHIC: Photo: Bill Geddes; James Watson was awarded the Nobel Prize in 1962.

LOAD-DATE: May 24, 2003


                              236 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2003 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                      May 10, 2003 Saturday Final Edition

SECTION: MAGAZINE; Pg. M12

LENGTH: 2518 words

HEADLINE: DNA, The science & mystery of this mortal coil

SOURCE: New York Times Service

BYLINE: Nicholas Wade

BODY:

   Fifty years ago this spring, two young scientists walked into the Eagle, a
dingy pub in Cambridge, England, and announced to the lunchtime crowd that they
had discovered the secret of life. By divining the chemical structure of DNA,
the archive of life, Dr. James D. Watson and Dr. Francis Crick had seen how the
molecule could encode information in the copious quantities necessary to program
a living cell.

   Years later Crick's wife, Odile, told him she had not believed him, he has
written. "You were always coming home and saying things like that, so naturally
I thought nothing of it," she said.

   But on that occasion the claim was true, and it set in motion a revolution
that has continued to unfold to this day, much of it guided by the two original
discoverers.

   Research is a slow process, often with years between each eureka. And even
today the DNA revolution remains largely behind laboratory doors, in the form of
biologists' ever-intensifying understanding of the mechanisms of life.

   But a few powerful inventions -- forensic DNA, a new wave of DNA-based drugs
-- have already had considerable effect, and many researchers believe they are
just a foretaste.

   They expect new medical treatments and diagnostic tests, based on a thorough
understanding of DNA, for cancer, heart disease and other long intractable
maladies.

   Yet like any powerful technology, DNA will doubtless bring vexing choices:
for instance, whether to modify the human genome with inheritable genes that
will eliminate disease and enhance desired qualities.

   And there are outright dangers, like the possibility that DNA techniques will
be used to make biological weapons.

   The 50th anniversary of the discovery of DNA's double helix may be more than
just a round number. After a long gestation, it is in the throes of passing from
a pure science to an applied one.

   After figuring out the structure of DNA, Crick and Watson realized that the
sequence of units in the DNA must carry the code in some way for the structure
of the proteins that are the working parts of a cell. But they did not foresee
that the entire genomes would one day be decoded.

   "Did we appreciate how important DNA was? Yes we did," Crick said. "We did
see the shape of the genetic code. But we didn't foresee rapid sequencing."

   "The pace of discovery is going unbelievably fast," Watson said.

   The Watson-Crick discovery showed that DNA records genetic information in the
form of a four-letter alphabet. But obtaining the text of the message that
evolution has taken some four billion years to compile was no easy task. It was
another 20 years, in the mid-1970s, before one of their Cambridge colleagues,
Dr. Fred Sanger, worked out an ingenious method for determining the order of the
letters in a stretch of DNA.

   But Sanger's method was manual and could decode long DNA messages only with
great difficulty. Others, chiefly scientists at Applied Biosystems, had to
automate the method and design DNA sequencing machines that could handle
genome-size lengths of DNA.

   Another essential advance was the PCR technique, invented by Dr. Kary Mullis,
for amplifying defined stretches of DNA into workable quantities.

   The genome era began on May 25, 1995, when Dr. J. Craig Venter announced that
he had decoded the first genome of a single-celled organism, a bacterium known
as Haemophilus influenzae. Since then about a hundred bacterial, plant and
animal genomes have been decoded, including the C. elegans roundworm, the
Drosophila fruit fly and the mouse -- laboratory organisms of vital interest to
biologists.

   With whole genomes available for study, biologists can at last begin to see
the precise mechanics of natural selection, the process that Darwin intuited
without any knowledge of its physical basis.

   As each new genome is deciphered, the tree of life comes into clearer focus.
Even creatures as far apart as human and mouse have turned out to possess
amazingly similar sets of genes, each with a similar sequence of DNA units. So
far each new genome has turned out to have some novel genes special to its own
species, as well as a core set having to do with the cell's basic operations,
which seem very ancient and probably trace back close to the origin of life.

   This genomic data -- three billion units apiece for animals like mice and
humans -- has presented biologists with a whole new set of challenges. New
devices, called microarrays or expression chips, have been invented for
examining the activity of thousands of genes at a time. A set of special
chemicals, known as an RNAi library, was announced last month for inactivating
each of the genes in the laboratory roundworm.

   A thriving new branch of science, often called computational or "in silico"
biology, has emerged to analyse the genes and other component parts of a genome
and to compare one genome to another. These techniques, developed for handling
many genes at a time, give biologists hope that they can understand the whole
human genome, now thought to contain some 30,000 or so genes.

   "A constellation of things is going on that make this a special time in
biology," said Dr. Thomas Cech, president of the Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, which finances major biomedical research. "Many of us underestimated
how powerful a tool the genome would be. To be able to ask a question of 30,000
genes at the same time and let the system tell you the answer is incredibly
exciting. You can unveil a process in a single-celled organism and then use
computers to discover by in silico experiments the human counterpart. That in
itself has largely transformed the way a lot of biology is done."

   The ability, gift of the genome sequence, to track thousands of genes at the
same time puts biologists in the position of being able to analyse the living
cell in action as it does its housekeeping or responds to the ceaseless chatter
of signals from its neighbours.

   The genomic era is also bringing about a quantum leap in biologists'
capabilities, drawing almost within contemplation one of biology's ultimate
goals, that of understanding a whole organism in terms of its DNA.

   For now, the DNA revolution is largely confined to understanding nature, not
changing it. Yet the few applications that have already appeared leave little
doubt of the technology's potential.

   DNA as a means of individual identification, first invented by Sir Alec
Jeffreys of the University of Leicester in England in 1984, has developed into a
hallmark forensic technique, strong enough to overturn verdicts based on shakier
forms of evidence like eyewitness testimony.

   Applied to stored biological evidence, DNA fingerprinting has proven the
innocence of many convicted inmates. To date the Innocence Project at the
Benjamin N. Cardozo School of Law, run by Barry C. Scheck and Peter J. Neufeld,
has exonerated 124 people.

   In Illinois, DNA evidence cleared so many death row inmates that Governor
George Ryan lost confidence in his state's justice system. Just before leaving
office last month, he commuted all death sentences to prison terms of life or
less.

   DNA testing has jolted the justice system because, properly used, it is an
almost infallible identifier of biological tissue. In Britain, which collects
DNA from everyone convicted of a crime, a growing database has allowed the
police to score many "cold hits," the match of DNA from tissue at a crime scene
to someone not on any list of suspects.

   The stunning reach of DNA fingerprinting, both to snare the guilty and clear
the innocent, has prompted suggestions for larger DNA databases, as well as
counterarguments from civil libertarians.

   DNA is also an unrivalled genealogical archive. By examining the DNA of the
living, biologists can reach back and resolve many otherwise inaccessible
questions. DNA evidence has added weight to the oral tradition, dismissed by
almost all historians, that Thomas Jefferson had a second, unacknowledged family
with his slave Sally Hemings.

   From the DNA of people living today, geneticists can infer the size of the
ancestral human population and track its movements across the globe as the first
modern humans dispersed from Africa.

   DNA has been used to modify crops, building bacterial genes for countering
insects into corn and cotton, and adding genes from daffodils and bacteria to
help rice make vitamin A.

   But the artificial mingling of genes from different species makes some people
uncomfortable, and genetically modified crops have encountered resistance,
especially in Europe.

   A new wave of DNA-based drugs is slowly reaching the market, beginning with
genetically engineered forms of insulin and growth hormone and now including
highly ingenious substances, based on a deep genetic knowledge, like Enbrel, for
rheumatoid arthritis, and Gleevec, a startlingly effective treatment for chronic
myelogenous leukemia.

   Waiting in the wings is a new wave of DNA-based diagnostic tests. One is a
test for an errant gene that is mutated early in many cases of colon cancer.

   Developed by Dr. Bert Vogelstein of Johns Hopkins University, the test is
applied to a stool sample and, together with other genetic tests, could provide
a cheaper and more acceptable screen for colon cancer than colonoscopy.

   The 30,000 or so genes in the human genome can now be programmed into
microarrays and used to profile the characteristic pattern of gene activity in a
cancerous cell.

   Dr. Todd Golub of the Whitehead Institute Center for Genome Research has
pioneered the use of gene expression chips to distinguish, within a given kind
of cancer, previously unrecognized subtypes that respond differently to
treatment. He hopes the chips will pinpoint both the errant genes special to
particular types of cancer as well as gene changes common to all cancer cells.

   "We are looking for magic bullets that target particular types of cancer but
also for the Achilles' heel that unites many different types of cancer," Dr.
Golub said. The tests, though yet to be approved by the Food and Drug
Administration, show the likely power and scale of genomic era medicine.

   A principal goal of the Human Genome Project was to identify the errant genes
that underlie common diseases, like diabetes, cancer, obesity, schizophrenia and
Alzheimer's. These disease genes have proved highly elusive, perhaps because it
takes several errant genes in combination to cause the disease, and the
contribution from each is hard to detect.

   A remarkable experiment is now under way in Iceland. A firm called Decode
Genetics has constructed a genealogy of much of the population.

   With it, Decode can build large pedigrees for patients with each disease of
interest. The company then scans the genomes of related patients, looking for
segments of chromosome they may have inherited from a common ancestor. Within
these shared segments it looks for variant genes that may contribute to the
disease.

   The company has identified several disease-causing genes, including one for
schizophrenia, and has inferred the general location of several others.

   From disease gene to drug is a long path, but identifying an errant gene
gives a deep, often novel, insight into the cause of disease and supplies new
targets for drug makers.

   Implicit in the understanding of DNA is the possibility of changing it, a
prerogative until now reserved for evolution.

   Gene therapy, the idea of patching up tissues by delivering the corrective
form of an errant gene, has so far been a failure. Even when it works, its
changes will not outlast the patient.

   But another approach, not yet technically possible or acceptable, is to
change the human genome in a heritable way. Instead of devising costly drugs or
therapies to treat the same diseases in each generation, why not go straight to
the source and fix all known errant genes in the egg or sperm?

   Germ line genetic engineering, as it is called, would make permanent fixes to
be passed from one generation to another. Advocates argue that however expensive
it might be to produce each perfect baby, the cost would be a fraction of the
lifetime health care otherwise needed.

   Such proposals arouse serious ethical concerns, from religious objections to
interventions that seem to usurp a creator's role, to biologists' fears that
genetic manipulation will subvert the essence of human nature.

   The DNA revolution is likely to present many such quandaries. It will
increasingly provide the means to repair and improve the machinery of life.

   Like all technology, DNA may have military uses. Though it is hard to improve
on the deadliness of natural scourges, that does not mean it will always be
impossible.

   "If we manage not to exploit biology for hostile purposes it will be the
first time our species has ever refrained from such exploitation," says Dr.
Matthew Meselson, a founder of molecular biology who has long worried about
biological warfare.

   "And if we don't refrain, I don't know how to predict what course it would
take. There is only one human species."

   Biologists recognize the depth of public concerns about genetic engineering.
Yet most hope that public can be educated to make what they regard as the right
choices.

   Watson was among the group of scientists who warned in 1974 of the possible
dangers of recombinant DNA, the technique that first allowed genes to be moved
from one species to another. At the Asilomar conference the next year scientists
imposed voluntary restrictions on experiments while the possible hazards were
assessed.

   Though Watson soon decided those dangers were overblown, he still believes
that scientists should talk frankly about the possibilities, good and bad, of
their work.

   "It is far better to tell it as it is and take the risk," he said. "We should
expect a constant concern from society as to where our knowledge is leading and
whether to deploy it. That certainly existed in the past, for instance in the
opposition to automobiles.

   "I mean, cloning now is the issue. But the first clone is not like the first
nuclear bomb going off. It's not going to hurt anyone! I know a famous French
scientist who never had children because there was madness in his family. He
didn't want to take a chance on more madness.

   "That's what I mean. Cloning might mean you would know there wasn't going to
be any more madness.

   "I think the paramount concern should be the rights of the family, as opposed
to the rights of the state. People say, "Well, these would be designer babies,"
and I say, "Well, what's wrong with designer clothes?"

   If you could just say, "My baby's not going to have asthma," wouldn't that be
nice? What's wrong with therapeutic cloning? Who's being hurt?

   If you thought every plant was the product of a god who put it there for a
purpose, you could say that you shouldn't change it. But America isn't what it
was like when the Pilgrims came here. We've changed everything. We've never
tried to respect the past, we've tried to improve on it.

   And I think any desire to stop people from improving things would be against
the human spirit.

GRAPHIC: Photo: Knight Ridder; DNA, building blocks of life.; Photo: Dr. James
D. Watson, co-discoverer of DNA's chemical structure: 'Pace of discovery is
going unbelievably fast.'; Photo: American museum of natural history; Computer
rendering of a DNA double helix in the process of separating in order to begin
replication

LOAD-DATE: May 10, 2003


                              237 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2003 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                       May 1, 2003 Thursday Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A07

LENGTH: 671 words

HEADLINE: West Nile blood testing causes concern

SOURCE: The Hamilton Spectator

BYLINE: Suzanne Morrison

BODY:

   A leading blood safety activist says the new test to screen blood for the
West Nile virus will be introduced this summer without undergoing the rigorous
testing it needs.

   Will the test be good enough to detect the potentially deadly virus in
donated blood?

   "The real issue is, we don't know," said Durhane Wong-Rieger, well-known
nationally for her fight on behalf of hepatitis C victims and former president
of the Canadian Hemophilia Society.

   Wong-Rieger said media reports have suggested the test will be licensed when
it's implemented July 1 but that's not the case.

   In actual fact, such licensing won't be in place, said Wong-Rieger, now
president and chief executive officer of the Anemia Institute for Research and
Education (AIRE). The two-year-old organization is dedicated to improving the
lives of people suffering from the blood disorder anemia, which affects tens of
thousands of Canadians.

   Last February, Dr. Graham Sher, chief executive director of Canadian Blood
Services, announced the CBS, Health Canada and drug manufacturer Roche
Diagnostics (Canada) are working together to have the test ready for use this
summer.

   "Our shared objective is to begin using it by July 1," Sher said.

   Usually, exhaustive investigations are done long before tests such as this
are widely used. However, with mounting anxiety over the West Nile virus, the
time frame for developing the West Nile test has been rushed.

   Wong-Rieger said this means initial "clinical trials" to determine if this
test really works will happen when it is being used in blood testing for the
first time. "It is a test that will just now be undergoing clinical trials," she
said. "We're testing it out with real blood donations, on real patients."

   Wong-Rieger has strong personal opinions about whether this is right or
wrong. But she declined to give them, preferring to keep her comments for a
presentation she's making tonight at a public forum AIRE is holding on Canada's
blood system at the Hamilton Convention Centre. The meeting takes place in
Albion Room "A" from 7 to 9 p.m.

   AIRE has held similar public forums across Ontario on blood safety, supply
and alternatives but the Hamilton forum stands out, Wong-Rieger said.

   For the first time, Julia Hill, Health Canada's newly appointed director
general, Biologics and Genetic Therapies Directorate, health products and food
protection branch, will be a panel member.

   Hill will arrive in Hamilton directly from the two-day SARS (severe acute
respiratory syndrome) meeting in Toronto convened by Health Canada with public
health officials from Canada, the United Kingdom, the United States, Mexico,
China and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations.

   Wong-Rieger said tonight's forum will give people the opportunity to talk
about how good the West Nile screening test is, what is being done, and what
needs to be done.

   "I think what we want to talk about is how real, and big, is the risk and
whether or not this is the appropriate thing to do," she said.

   A survey conducted by AIRE discovered AIDS and hepatitis C are the top
concerns of doctors, patients and the public.

   "This is somewhat surprising after all these years and after so much has been
done in terms of screening and testing for those two diseases," Wong-Rieger
said.

   The survey also showed people really don't understand current risks and what
reactions they might get to blood, leaving them poorly informed about what to
tell their doctors.

   More than two-thirds of those surveyed weren't aware there are alternatives
to blood transfusions.

   Other panellists at tonight's forum are Dr. Irwin Walker, head of hematology
at McMaster University Medical Centre; Dr. Nigel Colterjohn, a physician at
Hamilton Health Sciences who is one of a dozen Canadian leaders in
transfusion-free medicine; Dr. Morris Blajchman, head of transfusion medicine
for Hamilton; and Patti Thorne, centre director for Canadian Blood Services in
Hamilton and London.

   smorrison@thespec.com or 905-526-3474.

LOAD-DATE: May 1, 2003


                              238 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2003 Sun Media Corporation
                                The Toronto Sun

                      April 22, 2003 Tuesday Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 191 words

HEADLINE: FAILING HEARTS HELPED;
TESTS OFFER NEW HOPE

BYLINE: BY REUTERS

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   Heart patients who got injections of their own bone marrow cells got better,
and may have grown new heart tissue or blood vessels, U.S. and Brazilian
researchers reported yesterday.

   Their findings could offer a way to treat a hopeless and deadly condition,
the researchers said.

   "If our findings are confirmed in larger trials, this procedure could lead to
an effective treatment for severe heart failure, and perhaps to a new form of
gene therapy," Dr. James Willerson, president of the University of Texas Health
Science Center at Houston, said in a statement.

   Willerson, who led the study, Dr. Emerson Perin and colleagues tried the new
therapy on 14 dying heart failure patients in Rio de Janeiro. "The patients we
treated had end-stage heart failure," Willerson said in a telephone interview.
"They'd had it for months and years."

   Such patients often have one hope of recovery -- a heart transplant -- and
hearts for transplant are in desperate shortage.

   Writing in the journal Circulation, Willerson's team said the treated
patients had better heart function and less chest pain than untreated patients
used as a comparison.

LOAD-DATE: April 22, 2003


                              240 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2003 Sun Media Corporation
                         Edmonton Sun (Alberta, Canada)

                      April 11, 2003 Friday Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 53

LENGTH: 379 words

HEADLINE: CANADA SETS NEW BLOOD DONATION RESTRICTIONS

BYLINE: BY CP

DATELINE: TORONTO

BODY:

   Health Canada placed new restrictions on the collection of blood yesterday to
help preclude the possibility of SARS-tainted donations getting into the blood
supply.

   Dr. Paul Gully of Health Canada announced the changes at a SARS briefing in
Ottawa "although there is currently no evidence of transmission of SARS through
blood or blood components."

   The temporary deferral of donations affects people who travelled within the
previous 10 days to an affected area outside Canada -- China, Hong Kong, Hanoi,
Singapore and Taiwan.

   As well, those people who have been a patient in, worked in or visited a
facility that is under quarantine for SARS are asked to temporarily defer giving
blood.

   Those facilities are in the Toronto area, and include Scarborough Grace
Hospital, where some of the first Canadian SARS cases were treated, and York
Central Hospital in Richmond Hill, Ont.

   "The blood safety system in Canada is one of the best in the world precisely
because we take careful measures," said Julia Hill, director general of the
biologics and genetic therapies directorate at Health Canada.

   "We are simply saying that there is a theoretical risk, so why take the
chance? It's a temporary deferral.

   "So in a sense, we're really stating what is the obvious to most Canadians,"
she said, adding that going without these donations won't put any undue stress
on the system.

   Health Canada reported yesterday a cumulative total of 253 probable and
suspect cases of SARS in six provinces, up from 242 the previous day.

   The number of cases rose from 195 to 206 in Ontario yesterday with a total of
54 people discharged from hospital since the outbreak began.

   Officials in York Region, north of Toronto, are also in contact with police
to look into the possibility of charges being laid against someone who flouted
an order to remain in isolation.

   Gully said airlines at Toronto's Pearson airport are now asking departing
passengers whether they've read health alert notices about SARS available at the
terminal.

   Incoming passengers from Hong Kong, Singapore and on the Air Canada flight
from Beijing are receiving yellow SARS cards, and by the middle of next week
people arriving on all other flights from Beijing, Shanghai and Taipei will also
receive the cards.

LOAD-DATE: April 11, 2003


                              241 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2003 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                      April 11, 2003 Friday Final Edition

SECTION: CANADA & WORLD; Pg. C06

LENGTH: 568 words

HEADLINE: New restrictions on SARS; Avoid tainted blood donation

SOURCE: The Canadian Press

BYLINE: Anne-Marie Tobin

DATELINE: TORONTO

BODY:

   Health Canada placed new restrictions on the collection of blood yesterday to
help preclude the possibility of SARS-tainted donations getting into the blood
supply.

   Dr. Paul Gully of Health Canada announced the changes at a SARS briefing in
Ottawa, "although there is currently no evidence of transmission of SARS through
blood or blood components."

   The temporary deferral of donations affects people who travelled within the
previous 10 days to an affected area outside Canada -- China, Hong Kong, Hanoi,
Singapore and Taiwan.

   As well, those people who have been a patient in, worked in or visited a
facility that is under quarantine for SARS are asked to temporarily defer giving
blood.

   Those facilities are in the Toronto area, and include Scarborough Grace
Hospital, where some of the first Canadian SARS cases were treated, and York
Central Hospital in Richmond Hill.

   "The blood safety system in Canada is one of the best in the world precisely
because we take careful measures," said Julia Hill, director general of the
biologics and genetic therapies directorate at Health Canada.

   Canadians are very responsible, she said, and don't donate blood when they
aren't feeling well or when they're concerned they may have been exposed to
viruses of any sort when they are travelling.

   "So in a sense, we're really stating what is the obvious to most Canadians,"
she said, adding that going without these donations won't put any undue stress
on the system.

   Yesterday, Health Canada reported a cumulative total of 253 probable and
suspect cases of SARS in six provinces, up from 242 the previous day.

   The number of cases rose from 195 to 206 in Ontario yesterday, with a total
of 54 people discharged from hospital since the outbreak began.

   Besides the two Toronto-area hospitals that have been isolated in recent
weeks, a high school was closed Wednesday with teachers and students told to
isolate themselves for 10 days, and a Hewlett-Packard plant in Markham had 197
of its workers quarantined.

   "The new cases that we're talking about today are, of course, a
disappointment," said Dr. James Young, Ontario's commissioner of public
security.

   Officials in York Region, north of Toronto, are also in contact with police
to look into the possibility of charges being laid against someone who flouted
an order to remain in isolation.

   In Singapore, 490 people are under home quarantine due to SARS, and the
Health Ministry there plans to install monitoring cameras -- to be checked at
random -- in some homes.

   "Anyone found breaking the quarantine will be served a written warning and
given an electronic wrist tag," which will alert officials if they leave home,
the ministry said.

   Severe acute respiratory syndrome has killed 10 people in Canada in a little
over a month, all of them in the Toronto area.

   Yesterday, Prime Minister Jean Chretien dined in one of Toronto's Chinatowns
to deliver a message of tolerance in the midst of fears about SARS.

   Some Asian restaurants have experienced a serious decline in business, which
they blame on the fact that the disease was introduced to Canada from Southeast
Asia.

   The World Health Organization reports at least 111 SARS deaths around the
globe.

   The United States has 166 cases in 30 states under investigation, but no
deaths, said Dr. Julie Gerberding, director of the Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention.

GRAPHIC: Photo: Mike Cassese, Reuters; 'Soup's on,' as Margaret Wong serves Jean
Chretien a helping spoonful during the prime minister's photo-op in Toronto
yesterday. He was in Chinatown to deliver a message of tolerance in the midst of
fears about SARS in the country.

LOAD-DATE: April 11, 2003


                              247 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2003 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                    January 16, 2003 Thursday Final Edition

SECTION: CANADA & WORLD; Pg. B05

LENGTH: 406 words

HEADLINE: Gene study may lead to new obesity treatment

SOURCE: The Associated Press

BYLINE: Alex Dominguez

BODY:

   Gene manipulation that created sleek and trim roundworms may ultimately help
scientists develop new obesity treatments.

   Harvard biologist Gary Ruvkun used a new technique to identify about 400
genes in the roundworm's genetic code related to fat production and storage.

   His team deactivated, or "turned off," about 300 of the genes in experiments
and "the worms are thin and happy," Ruvkun said. When they knocked out the
activity of the other 100 genes, worms grew fatter.

   Details of the roundworm experiments and genetic technique appear in today's
issue of the journal Nature.

   "If someone told me we'd be using this kind of protocol even three years ago,
I'd have said that's crazy -- don't even think about it," Ruvkun said.

   Scientists frequently conduct basic experiments with roundworms -- known by
their scientific name as C. elegans -- because they are inexpensive and simple.
Scientists can fit 100,000 on a lab dish, and they reproduce within four days.

   Yet humans share about half the roundworm's 19,000 genes, including 200 of
the fat-storage genes. Whether the same gene knockout technique will work in
humans is unclear, but obesity drugs might be developed based on the basic
understanding of the genes, Ruvkun said.

   Other biologists cautioned that drug companies would need at least a decade
to safely develop a genetic therapy for obesity. One in five Americans is obese,
and obesity is implicated in cardiovascular disease, diabetes and other
illnesses.

   Ruvkun used a novel gene identification method developed at the Wellcome
Trust/Cancer Research UK Institute in England.

   Scientists study a gene by deactivating it and examining the organism. But
creating that version of an organism isn't always easy; scientists have needed
up to six weeks to create a knockout roundworm.

   In the new method, British researchers added genetic material from a
roundworm to bacteria. When they fed the bioengineered bacteria to the worms,
their immune systems recognized the genetic material carried by bacteria as
foreign and destroyed that sequence in their own genetic coding. In doing so,
the worms rapidly turned themselves into knockout versions.

   The technique takes advantage of the roundworm's defence against viruses and
"jumping DNA" from hijacking its own genetic code, said Julie Ahringer, a
Wellcome Trust researcher.

   "We can inactivate hundreds of worm genes in a day. "It's amazing."

LOAD-DATE: January 16, 2003


                              251 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2003 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                     January 10, 2003 Friday Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A08

LENGTH: 1574 words

HEADLINE: The who's who of ongoing medical research in Hamilton; Research
Checkup; Part 6 of 6

SOURCE: The Hamilton Spectator

BODY:

   Here is a snapshot of some of the many health research projects being carried
out at McMaster University, Hamilton Health Sciences and St. Joseph's
Healthcare. Please note that this is not a comprehensive list.

   PREVENTION OF TYPE 2 DIABETES

   What: An international clinical trial using newly developed drugs to prevent
type 2 diabetes, a condition in which the pancreas continues to secrete insulin,
but cells in the body become resistant to its effects. The study will follow
4,000 individuals at high risk of developing diabetes because of impaired
glucose tolerance. It involves researchers across Canada, U.S. and Europe.

   Where: McMaster University.

   Who: Dr. Hertzel Gerstein, professor of medicine, and Dr. Salim Yusuf,
professor of medicine.

   Funding: $25 million

   Source: King Pharmaceuticals, Aventis Pharma, and SmithKline Beecham, in
collaboration with the Canadian Institutes of Health Research.

   Time frame: Until March 31, 2006.

   DRUG THERAPY AND SENIORS

   What: Help seniors to choose and use medications, especially when they have
multiple medications with potential interactions and side effects.

   Where: St. Joseph's Healthcare

   Who: Dr. Lisa Dolovich

   Funding: $1.2 million

   Source: The Canadian Institutes of Health Research

   Time frame: Five years.

   TREATMENT OF THROMBOSIS

   What: To determine the best treatment for thrombosis, the formation or
presence of one or more blood clots that may partially or completely block an
artery.

   Where: St. Joseph's Healthcare.

   Who: Mark Crowther

   Funding: More than $200,000

   Source: Various

   Time frame: Ongoing

   DRUG USE, BEST PRACTICE AND COST EFFECTIVENESS

   What: To assess prescription and naturopathic medicines, their use and
developing methods for cost effective use.

   Where: St. Joseph's Healthcare

   Who: Mitchell Levine

   Funding: $418,104

   Source: Provincial government, Canadian Institutes of Health Research, and
private sector

   Time frame: Ongoing

   HEALTH SERVICES FOR THE AGED

   What: To better understand the needs of the frail elderly (dementia care,
end-of-life care) and their caregivers.

   Where: St. Joseph's Healthcare

   Who: Kevin Brazil

   Funding: $207,255

   Source: Canadian Institutes of Health Research, Canadian Health Services
Research Foundation, Greenshield.

   Time frame: Ongoing

   OBSESSIVE COMPULSIVE DISORDER

   What: To look at home-based versus office-based behavioural treatment of
obsessive compulsive disorder.

   Where: St. Joseph's Healthcare

   Who: Dr. Martin Antony

   Funding: $25,000 U.S.

   Source: Obsessive Compulsive Foundation

   Time frame: One year

   INFECTIOUS DISEASES

   What: To study diseases such as chlamydia, how they invade the body and
replicate, and identify novel targets for therapy.

   Where: St. Joseph's Healthcare

   Who: James Mahoney

   Funding: $186,000

   Source: Ontario government, World Health Organization, Merlin technology

   Time frame: Not available.

   TREATMENT FOR MAJOR DEPRESSION

   What: To see if transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS), which uses magnetic
energy to alter the activity of the brain, can alleviate symptoms in patients
with serious depression. TMS may have antidepressant effects similar to those of
electroconvulsive therapy (ECT), but unlike ECT, TMS does not induce seizures or
require a general anesthetic.

   Where: St. Joseph's Healthcare

   Who: Dr. Gary Hasey

   Funding: About $300,000

   Source: The Ontario Mental Health Foundation, the Father Sean O'Sullivan
Research Foundation, the Stanley Foundation and the Winberg Foundation.

   Time frame: At least two years.

   ARTHRITIS

   What: To assist primary-care physicians and other health professionals in
providing optimal care for people with arthritis. By enhancing current medical
training, the program will support better diagnosis and treatment for millions
of Canadians with arthritis.

   Where: St. Joseph's Healthcare

   Who: Dr. William Benson

   Funding: $1 million

   Source: Pharmacia Canada Inc. and Pfizer Canada

   Time frame: Five to seven years

   OSTEOPOROTIC FRACTURES

   What: To provide scientists, physicians and healthcare policy-makers with
crucial data to develop programs, to prevent and to treat osteoporosis and
fractures in Canada.

   Where: St. Joseph's Healthcare

   Who: Dr. Rick Adachi

   Funding: Over $10 million to date.

   Source: Several government and industry sources.

   Time frame: Ongoing

   BRAIN ANATOMY AND FUNCTION

   What: To develop techniques that will use MRI (magnetic resonance imaging)
and PET (positron emission tomography) technology in neuroscience research.

   Where: St. Joseph's Healthcare

   Who: Claude Nahmias

   Funding: $105,896

   Source: Canadian Institutes of Health Research

   Time frame: Ongoing.

   ANXIETY/DEPRESSION

   What: To examine how the immune system can create anxiety/depressive
behaviours.

   Where: St. Joseph's Healthcare

   Who: Boris Sakic

   Funding: $49,068

   Source: Canadian Institutes of Health

   Time frame: Ongoing

   HIV

   What: The goal is to find a vaccine against HIV, the virus that causes AIDS.
The focus is on a vaccine that would induce immunity of the mucous membranes of
the body -- the lining of the genital tract, lungs and intestines.

   Where: McMaster University

   Who: Dr. Ken Rosenthal and the McMaster Group in Mucosal Immunity

   Funding: $2.1 million

   Source: Canadian Institutes of Health Research

   Time frame: Five years

   GOOD CHOLESTEROL

   What: Investigating how HDL (good cholesterol) protects against heart disease

   Where: McMaster University

   Who: Bernardo Trigatti, assistant professor, biochemistry.

   Funding: $223,434

   Source: Canadian Institutes of Health Research

   Time frame: Until Sept. 30, 2004

   SHAMPOO AFTER CRANIOTOMY (SKULL SURGERY

   What: To see whether hair washing at 72 hours and before suture or clip
removal after craniotomy (incision through the skull) influences infection rates
or the patient's feelings of well-being.

   Where: St. Joseph's Healthcare

   Who: Sandra Ireland.

   Cost: $10,000

   Funding: Hamilton Health Sciences Research Development Fund

   Time frame: One year

   TINNITUS

   What: Understanding, treating and preventing tinnitus (ringing in the ears)

   Where: McMaster University, Human Neural Plasticity Laboratory

   Who: Dr. Larry Roberts

   Funding: $1.1. million

   Source: The Canadian Institutes of Health Research

   Time frame: Not available. (Study announced April, 2002)

   VIRUSES AND GENE THERAPY

   What: Study viruses and gene therapy to try to create better vaccines and
possibly cures for diseases such as cancer, hepatitis C, and muscular dystrophy.

   Where: McMaster University

   Who: Dr. Jonathan Bramson, assistant professor of pathology and molecular
medicine.

   Funding: $270,000

   Source: The Canadian Institutes of Health Research

   Time frame: Three years. (Study announced August, 2000)

   MEDICATED REGULATION OF HUMAN AIRWAY

   What: Asthma: investigating why it becomes so hard to breathe

   Where: McMaster University

   Who: Luke Janssen, associate professor, medicine.

   Funding: $242,700

   Source: Canadian Institutes of Health Research

   Time frame: Until September 30, 2003

   PERIOPERATIVE ISCHEMIC EVALUATION STUDY (POISE)

   What: Every year about 50,000 Canadians may suffer heart complications or die
after common operations. This study, involving 10,000 Canadian patients
undergoing non-cardiac surgery, seeks to figure out a way to stop heart problems
during and after surgery.

   Where: McMaster University

   Who: Homer Yang, professor, anesthesia.

   Funding: $5,306,074

   Source: Canadian Institutes of Health Research

   Time frame: Until March 1, 2007

   INFLAMMATION AND MOTILITY

   What: A study of how inflammation of the intestine muscle affects gut
motility -- how things move along in that system.

   Where: McMaster University

   Who: Steve Collins, professor, medicine.

   Funding: $848,634

   Source: Canadian Institutes of Health Research

   Time frame: Until March 31, 2004

   HUNTINGTON DISEASE

   What: Examining how and why the Huntington's disease protein invades the
nucleus in brain cells, using a specially-designed, high-magnification,
computer-controlled, robotic microscope to look directly at the Huntington's
disease protein in living brain cells.

   Where: McMaster University

   Who: Ray Truant, assistant professor, biochemistry.

   Funding: $177,980

   Source: Hereditary Diseases Foundation (U.S.)

   Time frame: Until Jan. 31, 2003

   IMMUNE MECHANISMS FOR PROTECTION OF THE COLON AND GENITOURINARYTRACT

   What: Development of immunization approaches to provide effective vaccination
for diseases such as AIDS and other sexually transmitted diseases.

   Where: McMaster University

   Who: Lead investigator: Jack Gauldie, professor, pathology and molecular
medicine.

   Funding: $760,649

   Source: Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR)

   Time frame: Until March 31, 2004

   ONTARIO TRAINING CENTRE FOR HEALTH SERVICES AND HEALTH POLICY RESEARCHERS

   What: Developing and evaluating an innovative and collaborative approach to
training the next generation of health researchers. Project shared with five
other Ontario universities.

   Where: McMaster University

   Who: Alba DiCenso, professor, nursing and clinical epidemiology and
biostatistics.

   Funding: $2.1 million

   Source: Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) and the Canadian Health
Services Research Foundation (CHSRF)

   Time frame: Until May 2008

GRAPHIC: Photo: Ron Pozzer, the Hamilton Spectator; Dr. Lisa Dolovich, who is
heading a research project on drug therapy and seniors, talks with Della
Mowbray, 86, at Medication Assessment Clinic.; Photo: Ron Pozzer, the Hamilton
Spectator; Biochemist Ray Truant at a laser microscope used in protein imaging.

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2003


                              252 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2003 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                    January 8, 2003 Wednesday Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1304 words

HEADLINE: Cracking the code of deadliest cancers; City research aids effort to
beat disease that claims 66,000 Canadians; Research checkup Part 4 of 6

SOURCE: Special to The Hamilton Spectator

BYLINE: Andrew Vowles

BODY:

   The numbers are still grim. This year alone, almost 137,000 new cases of
cancer will show up in Canada, according to statistics from the Canadian Cancer
Society.

   In its various forms -- especially breast, prostate, lung and colorectal
cancer -- the disease killed more than 66,000 Canadians in 2002.

   In labs and clinics across Hamilton, some 50 medical researchers are part of
the global hunt for a cure for some of cancer's most deadly forms.

   Much of that research occurs at the Hamilton Regional Cancer Centre (HRCC),
located in its own building at Henderson General Hospital. HRCC, which opened in
1992, is one of eight regional cancer centres across the province under the
umbrella of Cancer Care Ontario.

   The centre serves more than two million people in southwestern Ontario, and
doctors refer some 7,000 new patients here each year.

   Its department of research brings together clinicians, medical physicists and
other scientists in clinical and basic cancer research in four main areas:
tumour invasion and metastasis, especially in bone; clinical trials; health
services research and supportive care; and optical diagnostics and therapeutics.

   "A major focus of this centre, and cancer research in Hamilton, is invasion
and metastasis," says HRCC director Dr. Gurmit Singh.

   That means area researchers are investigating how and why cancer spreads to
different parts of the body, particularly to the patient's bones, from a primary
tumour.

   Singh is also studying mitochondria -- the energy powerhouses inside cells --
as possible targets for cancer chemotherapy by exploiting differences between
these cellular components in tumours and in normal cells.

   HRCC researchers are especially interested in how and why prostate cancer
develops and in finding new treatments. An estimated one in eight Canadian men
will develop the disease and it will kill one in four of those.

   Researchers like Michael Patterson, HRCC's head of medical physics, are
studying the use of photodynamic therapy, or a combination of special drugs and
laser light, to destroy tumours.

   DR. SUJATA Persad arrived at HRCC last spring from the British Columbia
Cancer Agency, where she studied how prostate cancer develops and spreads
through metastasis.

   "I look at pathways that may be involved in changing the invasive properties
of cancer cells so they are able to migrate and form tumours in other organs,
with a special interest in prostate cancer and also breast cancer."

   She says if they trace the myriad changes taking place inside cancer cells,
including the chemical signals involved in those changes, researchers might find
target molecules for new drugs to halt the process of invasion and metastasis.

   HRCC is also involved in many clinical trials designed to study drugs,
surgical techniques or combinations of treatments for prostate, breast, lung,
skin, ovarian and colon cancer, as well as various head and neck cancers.

   The centre is also home to the Supportive Cancer Care Research Unit, which
studies not cancer drugs or therapies but ways to share information with
patients and their families and ways to evaluate and improve support care
services provided by cancer centres, family physicians and other community
service providers.

   Across town, researchers in McMaster's health sciences faculty are studying
genes and proteins involved in cancer growth and spread. For almost 15 years,
researchers in the McMaster Institute for Molecular Biology and Medicine (MOBIX)
have been working with strains of so-called knockout mice with certain genes
removed in order to study their workings, particularly in breast cancer.

   "We have a mouse that gets cancer but not metastasis," says director Dr. John
Hassell, explaining that studying that mouse might help narrow down which genes
are responsible for the spread of cancer.

   "Very few groups in this country are using mouse models in cancer research,"
says Hassell, whose lab was the first to clone a particular gene involved in
breast cancer, the most frequently diagnosed cancer in Canadian women.

   He has recently studied genes important in metastasis, the process that is
most deleterious to cancer patients.

   "I'm interested in not (research) for its own sake but to find a cure for
breast cancer."

   MOBIX has become an umbrella organization for three related research units
based at McMaster. One is the Centre for Functional Genomics, where scientists
study the role of specific genes and the proteins they make in cancer growth and
spread. Another is the Antimicrobial Research Centre, which develops antibiotics
against drug-resistant bacteria.

   "EVEN THOUGH it may seem that the Antimicrobial Research Centre has nothing
to do with cancer, there are lots of ties to cancer research," says Hassell. For
example, a new lab within the centre that allows scientists to screen compounds
for potential new antibiotics can also be used to identify possible cancer
drugs.

   A key group is the Centre for Gene Therapeutics, which consists of some 25
scientists led by Dr. Jack Gauldie, chair of pathology and molecular medicine.
Among their projects: using special viruses called adenoviruses to transfer
cancer-fighting genes into cells; studying DNA damage and repair to improve
tumour radiation and chemotherapy; investigating proteins that regulate cell
cycles, especially proteins that interrupt the normal process of programmed cell
death and allow cancer cells to proliferate out of control; and developing and
studying animal models of breast cancer, melanoma, prostate cancer and
colorectal cancer.

   Among its promising research avenues is the use of gene therapeutics to
develop cancer vaccines that would stimulate the body's natural immune response
to recognize and fight the disease. Gene therapeutics involves using genes
themselves as drugs, packaging them to treat cancer the same way vaccines are
used to fight infectious diseases.

   Gauldie expects that a therapy involving the vaccine will be available in two
to three years.

   Having begun a clinical trial using gene therapeutics in skin cancer, they
plan to begin a new trial early this year using immunotherapy for breast cancer.

   "This is the only place in the country where this is happening," he says,
adding that Hamilton boasts "one of the strongest immunology groups in the
country."

   He expects Hamilton's role in gene therapeutics and cancer research will be
further strengthened after construction of a new molecular medicine centre to
house these research areas. Most of the research space in the new $30-million
centre, which will open in 2004 in a new wing behind McMaster University Medical
Centre, will house the Centre for Gene Therapeutics.

   GAULDIE EMPHASIZES that many of the researchers at the university collaborate
in their cancer studies with investigators at the regional cancer centre and at
area hospitals.

   At St. Joseph's Healthcare, respirologist Dr. Gerald Cox has studied
LungAlert, a simple, inexpensive test for lung cancer. The test detects a sugar
associated with cancer in a patient's sputum, meaning that a patient would have
to provide only a saliva sample.

   Cox has found that the test is effective in detecting the disease in its
early stages, critical information for treating the cancer before it spreads.

   As the leading cause of cancer death for men and women, lung cancer will kill
an estimated 18,400 Canadians this year.

   Other researchers at St. Joseph's are studying a protein involved in the
progression of prostate cancer, the second-leading cause of cancer deaths among
men, after lung cancer.

   At the hospital's Father Sean O'Sullivan Research Centre, doctors have
studied ways to scan lymph nodes for more precise diagnosis of disease of the
lymph system in patients with early-stage breast cancer.

GRAPHIC: Photo: John Rennison, the Hamilton Spectator; Dr. Sujata Persad holds a
Petri dish of treated prostate cancer cells in front of an incubator at Hamilton
Regional Cancer Centre, where she is researching how the disease develops and
spreads.

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 2003


                              253 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2003 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                     January 4, 2003 Saturday Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1942 words

HEADLINE: In Search of Ways to Save Lives; Research checkup: First of a six-part
series

SOURCE: The Hamilton Spectator

BYLINE: Suzanne Morrison

BODY:

   A blockbuster heart drug discovered in Hamilton made its world debut in
Philadelphia recently.

   Its inventor, Dr. Jeff Weitz, unveiled the life-saving blood thinner --
called only GH9001 because it's still in the early stages of development -- to
specialists from around the globe at the annual meeting of the American Society
of Hematology, the world's largest meeting of experts who treat blood disorders.

   Weitz is director of the Experimental Thrombosis and Atherosclerosis Group at
the Henderson Research Centre and an internationally acclaimed researcher on
blood clots and atherosclerosis.

   It now appears the drug could have a major positive impact on patients who
suffer heart attacks and strokes or develop blood clots after surgery. It has
gone through animal testing and early testing in humans and is showing that it
is better and safer than today's most commonly used blood thinners.

   Should the drug make it into the global market, spinoffs could become a
windfall for its investors, which include Hamilton Health Sciences (HHS) and
McMaster University. The worldwide market for blood thinners (antithrombotics)
is projected to grow to over $9 billion by 2005.

   Coupled with this is the potential prestige the major discovery of a new drug
would bring to Hamilton.

   GH9001 is just one of a thousand research projects under way in this city
that could lead to promising cures for life-threatening diseases and
disabilities. They range from small $5,000 ventures to multimillion-dollar
projects.

   In a special six-part series, The Spectator will explore the extensive
investigations being done to improve health.

   It's a major activity in Hamilton. In 2001-2002, McMaster University ranked
third in Canada for total research dollars. That's quite a feat for a mid-sized
university, said Dr. John Capone, associate dean of research.

   For health-related research alone, McMaster's faculty of health sciences and
its affiliated hospitals bring in about $135 million in grant money each year.
Health Sciences administers the bulk of that funding.

   Weitz discovered GH9001 in his laboratory, then spent nine long years
refining it. Most recently, he has been working on developing the drug with
GlycoDesign, a drug discovery and development company based in Toronto, and
Denmark's LEO Pharma.

   What's different about this drug is its ability to reach an enzyme called
thrombin, which binds itself to blood clots and helps them grow. Just as
important, it doesn't appear to cause increased bleeding, even in higher doses,
a drawback with current blood thinners.

   Weitz said GH9001 is proof that drug development research in Hamilton is
coming to fruition.

   This research has a domino effect -- on both individual lives and the local
economy. With new scientific discoveries happening so close to home, people
living here and in nearby communities benefit first as soon as a new drug or
treatment is translated into front-line patient care.

   One illustration of how that happens is research undertaken by Dr. Tim
Whelan, a radiation oncologist at the Hamilton Regional Cancer Centre.

   In a study of women with breast cancer who had undergone a lumpectomy, Whelan
found those who received three weeks of radiation treatment do just as well as
those treated for the standard five weeks. Women cared for at the cancer centre
experienced those benefits long before Whelan's results were peer-reviewed and
eventually published in the Journal of the National Cancer Institute.

   Capone, McMaster's associate dean of research, said every research project
boosts Hamilton's economy and brings with it new, high-paying jobs. That, in
turn, attracts highly qualified professionals to the city who end up buying
homes and shopping in local stores.

   An economic impact analysis is under way to pinpoint how many research
dollars actually go back into the community. The current guess is about 60 per
cent of research dollars flow back into Hamilton's economy, Capone said.

   "You've got high-quality, well-paying jobs that demand an educated workforce
which ultimately enriches our living. And these are things that only come in an
academic environment."

   From the beginnings of McMaster's medical school in the 1960s, Hamilton has
been blessed with world-class researchers.

   Prominent among those who have built international reputations for themselves
is Dr. Jack Hirsh, founder and executive director of the Henderson Research
Centre.

   Hirsh was inducted into the Canadian Medical Hall of Fame in 2000. His career
has combined an active laboratory search for new and more effective anticlotting
drugs (low molecular-weight heparins) with bedside patient care to determine if
what he finds in a lab is helpful in real-life situations.

   Weitz's research is being built on advances Hirsh made.

   As the result of Hirsh's work, it has become possible to improve the
treatment of deep-vein thrombosis, and to adjust the dose of oral anti-coagulant
drugs that reduce the chance of heart and stroke for people at high risk.

   Dr. John Kelton was recently inducted as a Fellow of the Royal Society of
Canada Academy of Science by Governor General Adrienne Clarkson. The award is
considered Canada's most prestigious academic accolade.

   Kelton has focused his research and care of patients on gaining a better
understanding of disorders involving platelets, the tiny blood cells that stop
bleeding and play a role in heart attacks and strokes.

   His work has changed the way patients with bleeding problems, most notably
pregnant women, are cared for, and the application of his work around the world
has won Kelton international recognition.

   The award is the most prestigious honour Kelton has received, but there have
been many accolades. Kelton, 53, dean and vice-president of the faculty of
health sciences at McMaster University, has had 25 years of continuous funding
from the Canadian Institutes of Health Research and the Heart and Stroke
Foundation of Ontario.

   Recently, his research contributions culminated in the awarding of a $1.4
million Canada Research Chair in transfusion medicine which will be used to
develop a major initiative in transfusion medicine in partnership with Canadian
Blood Services.

   He recently received the Bernard L. Schwartz Award from the Scripps Research
Institute for his work in blood diseases. Four previous winners have gone on to
win the Nobel Prize.

   Hirsh and Kelton are not alone. Many Hamilton researchers have garnered
similar acclaim for their work.

   Five eminent local scientists were honoured with appointments to advisory
boards of the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), Canada's premier
federal agency for health research.

   They are Dr. Paul O'Byrne, asthma and allergies, Dr. Salim Yusuf, cardiology,
Dr. Dan Offord, children's health and development, Dr. Jeremy Hurley, health
services and policy, and Dr. Jack Gauldie, infection and immunity.

   In recent years, a new generation of gifted young scientists has started to
emerge, taking a page from the book of their predecessors. For Hamilton, they
hold the promise of putting the city front and centre in the international
research arena.

   They are scientists like Dr. Sonia Anand, an acknowledged rising star
internationally in cardiovascular medicine. In her current work, Anand is
looking at the causes of cardiovascular disease in various ethnic groups,
including aboriginal people, while evaluating therapies used in the prevention
of heart attacks and strokes. Earlier this year, Anand was honoured with the Eli
Lilly Canada-May Cohen Chair in Women's Health.

   A host of others are making names for themselves:

   * Dr. Mehran Anvari, director of the Centre for Minimal Access Surgery at St.
Joseph's Healthcare, is conducting research into the feasibility of the first
widespread clinical use of robotics and telesurgery.

   * Dr. Mark Loeb, an infectious disease physician and medical microbiologist,
was the expert Hamilton Health Sciences relied on a little over a year ago when
a visitor from the Congo was suspected of having the deadly Ebola virus. Loeb's
specific focus is investigating infections in older adults.

   * Dr. Hertzel Gerstein's career is devoted to diabetes care and research. He
is currently principal investigator of a $25-million study that is testing the
possibility that diabetes can be prevented. His DREAM (Diabetes REduction
Approaches with Medications) study is attempting to determine if the drugs
ramipril and/or rosiglitazone can prevent Type 2 diabetes.

   * Yingfu Li is not only exploring the origins of life in his Hamilton
laboratory, he's recreating it.

   The McMaster scientist is studying DNA and RNA enzymes, first by creating
them in his laboratory and then by trying to understand their functions. By
experimenting with these enzymes, he hopes to discover whether they can be used
to destroy cancer cells or be engineered into tools that will insert RNA into
cells to repair genes.

   Li was recently presented with a Canada Research Chair, an award that will
let him work toward further discoveries and build on his record as one of the
first scientists to specialize in studying DNA enzymes.

   The spectrum of research under way in Hamilton is vast: child health, heart
disease, Alzheimer's and geriatrics, teen pregnancies, the quality of nurses'
working life, gene therapy, obesity, thrombosis and vascular disease, asthma and
allergies, the brain-body connection, cancer, AIDS vaccines, spinal cord repair,
gastrointestinal diseases, autism and rehabilitation.

   Capone said there are initiatives under way to build future interdisciplinary
links between the university and hospitals with the development of collaborative
groups. He calls it a transdisciplinary approach to research.

   This is part of a larger effort to support innovation with the goal that
Hamilton will become a magnet for investment and opportunity.

   The provincial government has set the goal of making Ontario the
third-largest home of the biotechnology industry in North America.

   In its March 2002 report, titled Building Ontario's Biotechnology Corridor,
the provincially appointed Ontario Biocouncil lays out a plan for growth and
commercialization.

   The Biocouncil, whose members include McMaster University Professor Jack
Gauldie, focuses on a biotechnology corridor that stretches from Ottawa to
London, Ontario and includes Hamilton, Toronto, Kingston and Guelph/Waterloo as
a key component in the development and expansion of Ontario's biomedical and
biotechnology industry.

   Capone said the report calls for the biotechnology industry to be
strengthened through the creation of biotechnology innovation clusters which
become centres for commercialization and investment.

   The city has identified four emerging clusters (including one in health and
biotechnology) and two traditional clusters (industrial manufacturing and
agribusiness).

   To support this, the Ontario government announced a $50-million investment in
biotechnology in its budget this year. The investment includes a $30-million
allocation for a Biotechnology Custer Innovation Program, a fund which Hamilton
and McMaster hope to access.

   Biotechnology research is under way in many McMaster laboratories and the
university is working with the city on the development of a biosciences
strategy, which includes the Hamilton Biosciences Business Incubator. The city
has committed $5 million towards this initiative.

   Capone believes it will become an increasingly important driver for economic
prosperity in our community.

   smorrison@thespec.com or 905-526-3474.

GRAPHIC: Photo: John Rennison, the Hamilton Spectator; Dr. Jeffrey Weitz holds
the GH9001 blood thinner he discovered at the Henderson Research Centre. It has
gone through animal testing and early testing in humans and is showing that it
is better and safer than today's most commonly used blood thinners.; Photo:
Scott Gardner, the Hamilton Spectator; GH9001, a blood thinner developed in
Hamilton, promises to save lives by helping people who suffer heart attacks or
strokes or develop blood clots after surgery.; Photo: Sheryl Nadler, the
Hamilton Spectator; Dr. John Kelton was recently inducted as a Fellow of the
Royal Society of Canada Academy of Science.; Photo: Scott Gardner, the Hamilton
Spectator; Dr. Jack Hirsh is internationally recognized in the prevention of
heart disease and stroke.; Photo: Scott Gardner, the Hamilton Spectator; Dr. Tim
Whelan found that radiation treatments could be shorter for some cancer
patients.

LOAD-DATE: January 4, 2003


                              254 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2002 Sun Media Corporation
                         Edmonton Sun (Alberta, Canada)

                    December 15, 2002 Sunday, Final Edition

SECTION: Spotlight; Pg. SL12

LENGTH: 533 words

HEADLINE: SCI-FI OR SCIENCE?;
DNA SWAPPING, INVISIBLE CARS ... IS IT REALLY POSSIBLE?

BYLINE: TIM FRIEND, USA TODAY

BODY:

   Can evil geniuses change their identity with gene therapy? Will releasing the
passenger ejector seat upright your speeding car after it flips upside-down on
an ice lake due to missile fire? Is it scientifically possible to make your car
invisible?

   The answers are yes, yes and yes - if your name is James Bond and you are
saving the world from destruction in the film Die Another Day.

   So what about the real world? A brief USA Today investigation examines these
questions.

   First, let's tackle gene therapy-identity change.

   The Bond screenwriters have the terminology all wrong. What they are talking
about is actually a "whole genome conversion," according to experts who asked
not to be identified for fear of being laughed at by their colleagues.

   That means swapping all of your own DNA for someone else's - quite the
technical challenge.

   After a decade of real human gene therapy, scientists have succeeded in
adding only a single gene to the DNA of a small number of patients to correct
the so-called bubble boy disease, in which patients have no immune system. Even
that limited success has its glitches: One patient developed cancer from the
therapy.

   If you are a real-life evil genius in need of a total identity change,
plastic surgery remains the option of choice. No one would dispute that Michael
Jackson, for instance, has has a significant change in appearance.

   But one scientist who does not fear his colleagues' ridicule raises the
frightening prospect that gene therapy is secretly being used to produce new
versions of the same identity. "It's obviously being used by the MI6 and CIA.
Just how many Bonds, Moneypennys and Felixes have there been over the years?"
asks Simon Gregory, one of the world's leading geneticists at the Wellcome Trust
Sanger Institute in Cambridge, England.

   Now, what about the ability of an ejector seat to flip your car right-side-up
in an emergency?

   Die Another Day features the Aston Martin V12 Vanquish - a car to die for.
Aston Martin has built cars for five Bond movies. The 1964 release of Goldfinger
marked the debut of the DB5. Company officials say it had an ejector seat.

   The V12, however, only has an ejector seat button, says a company spokesman.
She says that the Die Another Day scene in which Bond turns his car back over
using a passenger ejector seat was actually a special effect.

   Still, the Vanquish is a remarkable piece of technology - for a pricetag of
$234,260 US. Not only does Pierce Brosnan as Bond get to drive it in the movie,
the studio gave him one as part of his deal.
   Finally, what about invisibility?
 The U.S. military is developing new materials for battlefield vehicles that can
change colours to match the environment. Although they are not invisible, the
vehicles would be extremely difficult to see during the day.

   Materials scientists are also working to reduce heat emissions to make
aircraft and ground vehicles invisible to infrared sensors.

   One thing that is certain in the realm of real science: The U.S. military is
funding much of the most exciting research on the planet. But the most
sophisticated technologies will be in use for years before the public ever finds
out.

GRAPHIC: photo; James Bond's Aston Martin V12 Vanquish gets a jump on Zao's
Jaguar XKR in Die Another Day.

LOAD-DATE: December 15, 2002


                              260 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2002 Sun Media Corporation
                         Edmonton Sun (Alberta, Canada)

                    November 10, 2002 Sunday, Final Edition

SECTION: Spotlight; Pg. SL4

LENGTH: 873 words

HEADLINE: EVERYONE GAME FOR ANYTHING

BYLINE: STEVE TILLEY, EDMONTON SUN

BODY:

   TONY HAWK'S PRO SKATER 4 (PS2, XBOX, GAMECUBE)
    NEVERSOFT/ACTIVISION
 Few video game franchises dominate their genre the way the Tony Hawk titles do,
and Tony Hawk's Pro Skater 4 is all you need to explain this runaway success. As
good as Tony Hawk's Pro Skater 3 was, this latest sequel in the hyper-popular
skateboarding game series is not only better, it's damn near flawless.

   The nine intricate levels in THPS4, running the gamut from skate parks to
London city streets to Alcatraz island, are much larger than those in previous
games in the franchise. Fortunately, the biggest tweak to gameplay this time
around is you don't have to limit your ollie-'n'-nollie escapades to two minutes
in each level. Instead, each area is treated like a free-roaming skate until you
stop to interact with a bystander character, who will assign you a challenge
that you have to try to complete before a timer runs down.

   These tasks range from pulling off specific trick combos to grinding your
plank along moving vehicles, and the skater-specific pro challenges that are
unlocked when you've completed roughly half the 190 (!) regular challenges offer
up some very unique but extremely tricky feats. F'rinstance, guiding Bam Margera
of Jackass fame down a winding Alcatraz slalom course on his other signature set
of wheels: a shopping cart.

   Also new in this instalment are a couple of novel moves added to the skaters'
repertoires, including the spine transfer (allowing you to transfer from
back-to-back half-pipes) and skitching (grabbing the back of a moving vehicle
and going for a ride. Don't try this at home, kids.)

   There are minor variations in each console's version of THPS4, with the Xbox
iteration having slightly better graphics and the ability to play music from
your own custom soundtracks, the PS2 version having online play and arguably the
best control scheme, and the GameCube version having, um, that cute little
DVD-ROM.

   But no matter which one you pick, you're guaranteed another frighteningly
addictive ride through the extreme sports universe of everyone's favourite aging
skater daddy. Might as well quit your job now, since you're going to get fired
for missing work anyway.

   SCORE: 5 out of 5. Just when you think they couldn't possibly make the Tony
Hawk franchise any better, along comes another instant classic like this one.
Rad!
   - - -
   DEATHROW (XBOX)
   SOUTHEND INTERACTIVE/UBI SOFT
 Clone the Hanson brothers from Slapshot, dress 'em up in futuristic armour and
set them loose in a full-contact sport that mixes American Gladiator, Frisbee
golf and that weird Slamball game they play on TNN, and voila - you've got
Deathrow, one of the most fun and fast-paced sports games available on Bill's
big black box.

   A few hundred years from now, when television viewers are finally tired of
the WWE and Survivor XXVI: Antarctica, the most popular reality show on TV is
Blitz, a ruthless arena sport in which the object is to hurl a disc through the
opposing team's circular goal while beating the snot out of the other side's
players in the process. You don't see many games where passing, shooting and
defending the goal are as important as punching, tripping and stomping on your
opponents. Except maybe Aussie rules football.

   What could have been just another generic pseudo-sports video game is raised
several notches by great graphics, imaginative settings, cool flying disc
physics and finely tuned gameplay that demands practice and discipline to
master. Beating the higher-ranked teams means using all the tricks, moves and
tactics at your disposal, and even winning your first game will probably take
several attempts, during which you'll be crushed like a bug again and again by
the A.I. teams.

   But when you score seven unanswered goals in the fourth round of a game to
come from behind and beat a particularly tough team 13 to 12 - that's a sweet
feeling indeed. And as you progress further in the championship-style conquest
mode and earn money for racking up wins, new players can be added to your roster
and their abilities upgraded, sometimes through experimental gene therapy or
old-fashioned illegal drugs.

   Deathrow also has great co-operative and head-to-head multiplayer modes for
split-screen or Xbox system link play, but, once again, what could have been a
killer title for the upcoming Xbox Live service has shipped without support for
true online gameplay.

   Oh, and a sensitive grandma alert: the mature-rated Deathrow is rife with
bone-crunching violence and more cussin' than any video game in recent memory.
The first time I heard one of my computer-controlled teammates utter an
expletive that roughly translates to "one who fornicates with his female
parent," my jaw literally dropped. But like The Sopranos, it just makes Deathrow
that much more of a guilty pleasure.

   SCORE: 4 out of 5. Fun, fast and surprisingly deep, this one has got sleeper
hit written all over it. In four-letter words.
   - - -
 NEXT WEEK: It could easily end up as the best-selling video game of all time,
and we'll tell you why when we don our vintage '80s pastel blazers and mesh
shoes to review Grand Theft Auto: Vice City for the PS2. As Frankie would say:
Relax!

GRAPHIC: 2 photos; 1. Tony Hawk's Pro Skater 4 offers players an almost flawless
action game with plenty of time to perform big air jumps and ultracool tricky
feats.; 2. Deathrow mixes American Gladiator, Frisbee golf and the Slamball game
they play on TNN.

LOAD-DATE: November 10, 2002


                              262 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2002 Sun Media Corporation
                                The Toronto Sun

                     November 4, 2002 Monday, Final Edition

SECTION: News; Pg. 31

LENGTH: 279 words

HEADLINE: KEEP AN EYE ON THESE CANUCKS

BYLINE: JACK BOLAND, TORONTO SUN

BODY:

   A Toronto man is among two Canadians selected by Esquire magazine as one of
the top 40, up-and-coming, men of influence in the world.

   The December edition of the international men's magazine hits the newsstands
today and highlights two Canadians of note: Josef Penninger, a U of T immunology
professor, and Ryan Gosling of Cornwall, an up-and-coming actor.

   "The idea was to look for people who have accomplished much already, but may
not be famous yet," Peter Griffin, deputy editor of Esquire magazine, said in an
interview.

   "We thought the both of them in their fields would have a big impact in the
years ahead."

   Penninger, 38, was picked for his work with gene research and especially the
DREAM gene (downstream regulatory element antagonistic modulator) -- a gene he
and his lab technicians focused on during their research into white blood cell
growth.

   "He had a broad influence in the world of immunology and molecular biology as
well as gene therapy," Griffin said. "So we asked him to write something about
his works."

   The DREAM gene research used laboratory mice and studied pain control.

   Gosling, who had a great impact last year starring in a movie about an
American neo-Nazi called The Believer, was named to the 40 influential new faces
list because of his potential.

   "It was a very powerful performance," Griffin said of the 21-year-old actor's
role in The Believer. "So we are touting him as one of the next great actors in
Hollywood."

   Former U.S. president Bill Clinton was picked to write a brief foreword for
the December issue because he was picked as a recipient of this honour in 1984
when he was governor of Arkansas, Griffin said.

GRAPHIC: 1. photo of JOSEF PENNINGER; U of T professor; 2. photo of RYAN
GOSLING; Future star

LOAD-DATE: November 4, 2002


                              267 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2002 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                     October 11, 2002 Friday Final Edition

SECTION: CANADA & WORLD; Pg. B04

LENGTH: 518 words

HEADLINE: Promising therapy for Parkinson's patients

SOURCE: The Associated Press

BYLINE: Paul Recer

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   In the first use of gene therapy to treat Parkinson's disease, researchers
will inject genes that make a vital neurochemical into the brains of 12 patients
to try to calm the tremors of the devastating brain disorder.

   Dr. Matthew During and Dr. Michael Kaplitt said the Food and Drug
Administration has approved the experimental therapy for the patients.

   The approval was based, in part, on results of a lab study to be published
today in the journal Science.

   Kaplitt, a Parkinson's researcher at the Weill Medical College of Cornell
University in New York, said the gene therapy trial will start late this year
and involve patients who have exhausted all standard therapies.

   During, a researcher at the University of Auckland in New Zealand, and
Kaplitt are senior authors of the Science study.

   The researchers showed with rats that transferring the brain chemical gene
could greatly improve Parkinson's symptoms and may slow its progression.

   The researchers said the technique has also been tried in monkeys with
encouraging results.

   Other researchers said gene transfer is promising, but extensive clinical
trials will be needed before it proves itself ready for treatment of Parkinson's
patients in general.

   "You've got to be cautious with gene therapy," said Dr. Christopher Ross, a
professor of psychiatry and neuroscience at the Johns Hopkins University School
of Medicine in Baltimore.

   "If they see the same results in humans, it will be an important new approach
to therapy."

   In the study, the researchers placed a gene that makes a brain chemical
called GABA into a benign virus called adeno-associated virus.

   This chemical works in a part of the brain called the subtahlamic nucleus, or
STN, to calm or inhibit the motor movements of the body.

   The STN in Parkinson's patients has very little GABA. This causes the
characteristic disease symptoms of tremors, a halting walk and the tendency to
suddenly "freeze" while in motion.

   Using rats who have chemically-induced Parkinson's, the researchers injected
the manipulated virus into the affected part of the brain.

   The injected virus, carrying the GABA gene, moves inside cells in the STN and
causes the cells to produce GABA.

   During and Kaplitt said the effect was shown quickly in the rats. Movement
control was better in all the animals, "but for 50 per cent of them there was a
remarkable improvement," During said.

   Kaplitt said the same experiment has been performed on Rhesus monkeys, but
the results are not yet published and neither researcher would discuss the
findings in detail.

   "There is nothing in the primate study that would discourage us," said
Kaplitt.

   Parkinson's disease is a brain degeneration disorder diagnosed in thousands
of patients annually.

   It occurs in about 1 per cent of everyone over the age of 60, but also can
strike at a younger age. About 25 per cent of the 1.4 million patients in the
United States were diagnosed before the age of 40.

   Besides the movement symptoms, some Parkinson's patients develop depression,
loss of memory and the ability to think clearly.

LOAD-DATE: October 11, 2002


                              272 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2002 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                    September 13, 2002 Friday Final Edition

SECTION: CANADA & WORLD; Pg. B05

LENGTH: 382 words

HEADLINE: Scientists reprogram heart cells in rodents

SOURCE: Healthscout News Service

BYLINE: Serena Gordon

BODY:

   With the help of gene therapy, researchers have reprogrammed guinea pig heart
cells to do a pacemaker's job, and they hope to one day be able to do the same
for humans.

   A team from the Johns Hopkins School of Medicine in Baltimore, Md., got the
rodents' hearts beating properly by changing the function of less than 1 per
cent of their heart cells. The researchers report on what they call the first
"biopacemaker" in the Sept. 12 issue of Nature.

   Dr. Eduardo Marban, the lead researcher, says scientists envision a day when
doctors can recreate a human's pacemaker cells rather than having to implant an
electronic pacemaker. He adds, though, that the possibility is years away.

   Normally, the heart's pacemaker cells, which are found in the blood-receiving
chamber called the atrium, generate electrical impulses that spread through the
organ and make it contract. With age or illness, natural human-pacemaker cells
die off, making a pacemaker necessary.

   More than 600,000 pacemakers are implanted every year, according to the
American Heart Association. These battery-operated devices work by artificially
replacing the heart's natural electrical impulses.

   Most heart cells are set to maintain a level of potassium that makes it
difficult for them to send electrical signals, or "fire." That means they can't
generate an electrical signal on their own. They must wait to be triggered by
pacemaker cells.

   The Hopkins researchers suspected that if they could alter the potassium
balance in the heart cells, the cells might be able to fire without being
triggered.

   To do so, they needed to block the usual potassium "channel" that keeps
potassium levels in check.

   They did this by altering the gene that controls the potassium channel,
inserting it into a virus and then injecting it directly into the guinea pig
heart cells.

   Three to four days later, the animals' heart cells started producing the
defective potassium channel, according to the study. Then, those cells started
firing electrical impulses on their own.

   Marban says the researchers saw no evidence of adverse effects from the gene
therapy. He says the researchers plan on testing the gene therapy on larger
animals and, if all goes well, they hope to start human trials in as little as
four years.

LOAD-DATE: September 13, 2002


                              273 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2002 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                     September 6, 2002 Friday Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A08

LENGTH: 562 words

HEADLINE: Drugstores fund Mac research chair

SOURCE: The Hamilton Spectator

BYLINE: Suzanne Morrison, Medical Research Reporter

BODY:

   It's ragweed season, and your nose is constantly running, you suffer
uncontrollable bouts of sneezing, and your stuffy nose and sinus headache won't
let up.

   As you reach for the allergy medicine, think about the cutting edge of
genetic research unfolding in Hamilton that may soon find a solution to your
annual misery.

   Genetic medicine -- using genes as drugs -- is expected to revolutionize the
practice of medicine, and researchers at McMaster University are likely to lead
the way, thanks to a donation from Shoppers Drug Mart.

   Arthur Konviser, Shoppers' senior vice-president of corporate affairs,
yesterday announced a $750,000 donation to McMaster to endow a research chair in
molecular medicine.

   Contributions from the university and other donors will bring funding to $2
million.

   The research chair is named for Dr. John Bienenstock, former dean of the
faculty of health sciences and a world expert on mucosal immunology and
allergies.

   The initial holder is Dr. Jack Gauldie, chair of McMaster's department of
pathology and molecular medicine -- and a world expert in his own right.

   Gauldie coined the term "gene therapeutics" to describe his innovative
combination of immunology and gene therapy that's used to stimulate the immune
system and fight diseases. His team at McMaster is the first in Canada to use
this approach.

   Funding for the new research chair will provide financial backing that will
enable Gauldie and his team to continue their research into the development of
gene-based medicine to treat acquired diseases such as cancer; inflammatory
diseases such as seasonal allergies, arthritis and asthma; and infectious
diseases such as tuberculosis.

   "If we can figure out how to stimulate the immune response, we will have the
keys to slow it down or change it. Then we may be able to halt the progression
of these chronic, debilitating diseases," Gauldie said.

   Dr. John Kelton, dean and vice-president of the faculty of health sciences,
anticipates that over the next decade, genes will be used as prescription drugs.

   With that in mind, it's highly appropriate that two accomplished McMaster
scientists, Gauldie and Bienenstock, are associated with this pursuit, he said.

   Scientists say genetic medicine holds much more promise for patient care than
the methods doctors use today to detect health problems -- a physical
examination, blood pressure readings and listening to the heart and lungs.

   They predict that in 10 years or so, each of us may have our own genetic
report card that will help predict diseases, screen for others and avoid certain
illnesses altogether.

   Gene-based medicine may help treat patients after symptoms have already
begun, by adding or altering genes. In heart disease, for example, new blood
vessels could be created and existing ones prevented from becoming clogged.

   This week, that scenario is already unfolding at Toronto's St. Michael's
Hospital, where researchers are leading the first clinical trial in North
America in which heart patients are being given a gene to encourage blood vessel
growth to get around clogged arteries.

   The 34 Shoppers Drug Mart stores in the Hamilton area were instrumental in
helping the corporation contribute to molecular research at McMaster.

   You can contact Suzanne Morrison at smorrison@hamiltonspectator.com or at
905-526-3474.

LOAD-DATE: September 6, 2002


                              274 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2002 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                    September 5, 2002 Thursday Final Edition

SECTION: CANADA & WORLD; Pg. B03

LENGTH: 495 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy being tested on heart patients

SOURCE: The Canadian Press

BYLINE: Helen Branswell

DATELINE: TORONTO

BODY:

   In theory, gene therapy offers hope as the answer to myriad medical problems.
But can theory translate into reality?

   Terence Deane is keen to find out. So keen that he signed up to be the first
subject in a clinical trial that should determine whether delivering a gene that
promotes blood vessel growth to the heart will ease the suffering of people like
him, known in the cardiac care community as "no option patients."

   Deane, 58, suffered a heart attack nearly a decade ago and has battled
severely clogged arteries ever since. He is no longer a candidate for arterial
bypass surgery or angioplasty (a procedure in which a blocked artery is cleared
using a small balloon inserted via a catheter).

   Chest pain is a constant companion, forcing him into early retirement and
making him think twice about many of the small tasks most people do as a matter
of course. "The quality of life is very poor," said Deane, who lives in Windsor.

   A week ago, doctors at St. Michael's Hospital in Toronto made a small
incision in his groin. They threaded a catheter bearing a small needle up to his
heart and injected blood-starved portions of that organ with either the gene
treatment -- known as vascular endothelial growth factor -- or a placebo. The
trial is a randomized, double-blind one, meaning neither the researchers leading
the study nor Deane will know until the trial is over whether he received the
placebo or the growth factor. The trial is expected to last two years.

   Dr. Duncan Stewart is the lead investigator of the trial, which will
eventually enrol 110 similar patients at cardiac centres in Toronto, Victoria,
Montreal, Edmonton and Quebec City. The lead hospital is St. Michael's, where
Stewart is head of cardiology.

   Previous studies at St. Michael's have confirmed the safety of the procedure.
But Stewart believes this is the first clinical trial in North America to test
the efficacy of using gene therapy to increase blood flow to the hearts of
patients like Deane, who make up about 15 per cent of cardiac patients.

   The process of developing new blood vessels occurs constantly in the body.
Often when an arterial blockage occurs, the body compensates by developing
secondary routes into the heart.

   "There's a lot of patients walking around with blocked arteries, a single
blocked artery, that are feeling perfectly fine," said Dr. Michael Kutryk, a
co-investigator on the trial.

   "And the reason is that something within them has allowed them to make blood
vessels very well from other blood vessels in the heart. They compensate. And
some individuals don't make those blood vessels as well."

   The researchers hope that by giving these patients a gene that encourages
blood vessel growth, they'll be able to do what healthy individuals do
naturally.

   "What we're trying to do is add additional fuel lines," Stewart said. "The
body does this on its own. It's just that in people like Mr. Deane, it's not
efficient enough."

LOAD-DATE: September 5, 2002


                              279 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2002 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                      July 25, 2002 Thursday Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A03

LENGTH: 614 words

HEADLINE: Mac prof to head team on genetics; Committee to advise province on
newest advances in genetics field

SOURCE: The Hamilton Spectator

BYLINE: Suzanne Morrison, Medical Research Reporter

BODY:

   As scientists continue to unravel the genetic underpinnings of human
diseases, the Ontario government has appointed a world leader based at McMaster
University as its key adviser.

   Health Minister Tony Clement announced yesterday that Dr. Ronald Carter has
been named chair of the province's newly formed Ontario Advisory Committee on
Genetics that will provide advice to the government about the newest
developments in genetic sciences and new genetic tests.

   "I think it's wonderful the government has decided to go ahead with this,"
said Carter, adding the initiative supports recommendations from a recently
released report to the government from an advisory committee on genetic
technology.

   "I think the committee will help provide improved genetic services to the
people of Ontario and I'm really looking forward to working with both our
medical community and the province to fulfil our mandate."

   Carter suspects a formal committee such as this doesn't exist in other
provinces. "I think this committee is probably going to be unique in the way
that it's charged with assessing possible benefits and looking at outcomes."

   Carter, associate professor of pathology and molecular medicine in McMaster's
faculty of health sciences, is president of the Canadian College of Medical
Geneticists. He was a founding fellow of the American College of Medical
Geneticists.

   Carter was appointed to the former Chedoke-McMaster Hospitals (now Hamilton
Health Sciences) in 1990, and directed the regional cytogenetics laboratory in
Hamilton from 1991 to 1999.

   He is currently head of cancer genetics for the regional genetics service of
South Central Ontario/Hamilton Regional Laboratory Medicine Program and a
consultant in pathology for the Hamilton Regional Cancer Centre, Cancer Care
Ontario.

   A graduate in science and medicine from the University of Toronto, Carter
also received a degree in veterinary medicine, and his PhD, from the University
of Guelph. He was a Medical Research Council Fellow/Post-Doctoral Fellow from
1983-1989, and has been involved in a variety of research programs which include
gene therapy and diagnostic laboratory genetics research.

   "As president of the Canadian College of Medical Geneticists, Ron Carter is a
world renowned leader in this field," said Clement. "His expertise will provide
our government with invaluable advice as we continue to find ways to diagnose
and treat ailments more quickly and effectively."

   Each human life begins with a single, microscopic cell. This single cell
contains no bones, liver, brain, or any other adult tissue, but does contain a
full complement of genetic instructions (genes) to create all these tissues.

   In this very real sense, our genome is a blueprint for people. The genetic
blueprint encodes the sequences of all the proteins within our bodies and also
programs human development for all stages of our lives from the single cell to
old age.

   Some human traits and diseases are completely heritable; some partially
heritable; and some are not influenced by genes at all.

   The Human Genome Project is an organized, international effort to map and
sequence the entire human genome. The great majority of the human DNA sequence
has now been determined.

   Carter foresees an increasing ability to detect increased risk for diseases
that have a genetic component.

   "Some of those will be common mature adult-onset diseases, things like (high
cholesterol), cardiovascular disease and risk of stroke," he said. "We do
testing now for increased risk for bleeding and you will see more than that."

   You can contact Suzanne Morrison at smorrison@hamiltonspectator.com or at
905-526-3474.

GRAPHIC: Photo: Ronald Carter

LOAD-DATE: July 25, 2002


                              281 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2002 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                      July 18, 2002 Thursday Final Edition

SECTION: FORUM; Pg. A11

LENGTH: 963 words

HEADLINE: Genetic engineering is disabling

SOURCE: The Hamilton Spectator

BYLINE: Sal Vella

BODY:

   As part of an ethics course, I was recently reading Genohype: The Overselling
of Genetics, by Neil Holtzman. When a fellow disability-rights advocate phoned
and asked what I was doing, I told him I was reading about genetics. "You mean
the new wave quick fix for getting rid of us?" he joked.

   His reaction isn't uncommon among disabled people, especially those of us who
advocate disabled people's rights. We feel a strong sense of community, have an
understanding in who we are and have become acutely aware of the many forms of
discrimination and human-rights abuses which, for us, define disability. We now
see another abuse is being added -- discrimination because of what genetics
claims to offer.

   So what does it offer? Cures, of course -- the final solution for disability.

   This sounds great for most people. After all, does society want children born
with spina bifida or cystic fibrosis? If these and other conditions can be
prevented with the help of clinical genetic treatment, what could possibly be
the problem? There are, of course, a great many problems. But the most obvious
is that after billions of dollars and a decade of orchestrated hype from the
biotech-medical industry, there is no gene therapy that has worked.

   With no effective somatic gene therapy likely and even researchers like Dr.
William French Anderson, the pioneer of gene therapy, admitting that we are
probably two decades away from successful germ-line therapy, where does this
leave disabled people right now?

   Well, we can talk about "what if" forever. Visionary ideas have their place,
but instead let's talk about what is. And "what is" is simple: The only proven
cure for most genetic conditions is Peter Singer's infanticide, abortion
following genetic testing or embryo selection as part of in-vitro fertilization.

   Singer is a controversial Princeton bioethicist who is also arguably the most
influential philosopher in the world today. He is a utilitarian philosopher who
argues strongly for animal rights. Yet on the other hand, he banishes disabled
people from the realm of "personhood" by advocating the elimination of severely
disabled babies, who he claims would only become burdens to society.

   Now, and for some time to come, the biotech steamroller has nothing to offer
disabled people. But perhaps the worst aspect of the entire project is that it
has come in a wrapping that is, itself, disabling. To justify the steamroller,
disabled people have been presented, at best, as objects of pity, and at worst,
as costly mistakes that could be avoided. Why else would we need so desperately
to be cured? Why else would Bob Edwards, world-renowned embryologist and IVF
pioneer, have said recently: "Soon it will be a sin of parents to have a child
which carries the heavy burden of genetic disease. We are entering a world where
we have to consider the quality of children"?

   This view is reminiscent of medieval religious ideas of disability being
punishment for "the sins of the fathers." Talking about the genetic "quality
control" of children as a new public responsibility is reminiscent of ideas
prevalent in the 1930s about threats to the population stock from those classed
as "imbeciles," criminals or alcoholics. What do such ideas about the supposed
new responsibilities arising from genetic knowledge mean for disabled people and
society as a whole?

   Genetics is a fast-paced field of scientific development. Disabled people are
involved by default because our impairments are used as justification for
enormous resources being used for research. In fact, the big bucks may reside
more in the increasingly consumer-led approach to reproduction -- "positive
eugenics" -- and the tests to screen out individuals with "bad genes" --
"negative eugenics" -- rather than in effective treatments for people with quite
rare genetic conditions.

   In addition, "new hope" for disabled people is accompanied by the danger of
disabled people and others experiencing increased discrimination in employment,
insurance, health care provision and education. This is where disabled people
feel a responsibility to raise the alarm. There shouldn't be unfair
discrimination in our health service, in employment, in insurance -- but there
is. For years, disabled people have been turned down for jobs that they were
qualified for, denied or charged high premiums for insurance for spurious
reasons. The discrimination that disabled people have faced and continue to face
should act as a warning about what may come.

   Many in society see disability as a purely medical problem -- and genetics
offers new "empirical" evidence to bolster this view, alongside the promise of
potential miraculous solutions. For those of us who see disability as a
political and human rights issue, the "cure" for the negative experiences that
many disabled people face lies elsewhere -- in according value to people's
lives, in ensuring that society is accessible and open to the needs, rights and
talents of disabled people. It does not mean a rejection of good quality health
care, available on an equal basis according to need, not resources or judgments
about "quality of life."

   It is clear that while the hype has been about cure, the reality is about
termination. Under the wheels of the biotech steamroller, a climate of
intolerance against disabled people is being encouraged.

   Most disabled people do not oppose medical research or genetic testing -- if
it is part of an ameliorative therapy or the treatment of illnesses or genetic
conditions. What is opposed is eugenic cleansing carried out in the name of
treatment. The price is too high for everyone.

   Sal Vella lives in Hamilton. He is a disability rights advocate and past
president of United Disabled Consumers.

GRAPHIC: Photo: Hamilton Spectator File Photo; The promotion of genetic 'quality
control' of children suggests that disabled people are objects of pity or costly
errors.

LOAD-DATE: July 18, 2002


                              284 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2002 Sun Media Corporation
                         Edmonton Sun (Alberta, Canada)

                      June 28, 2002 Friday, Final Edition

SECTION: News; Pg. 64

LENGTH: 217 words

HEADLINE: DOCTORS CURE 'BUBBLE BOY' KIDS

BYLINE: AP

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   Using an experimental technique that altered genes in bone marrow stem cells,
doctors cured two children who were born with the "bubble boy" disease that
leaves patients defenceless against infection.

   The children were born with a form of severe combined immunodeficiency
disorder caused by a gene flaw that blocks production of an enzyme called ADA,
which is essential to make disease-fighting immune cells.

   Doctors in Italy and Israel cured the children with injections of bone marrow
stem cells that had been altered to contain the missing enzyme gene.

   In a matter of months, the researchers report in this week's edition of the
journal Science, both children had healthy immune systems.

   Dr. W. French Anderson, a University of Southern California researcher and a
pioneer in the field, said the research is an important advance for the entire
concept of gene therapy.

   "This gives a boost to the whole field because it proves our basic premise
that if you can get enough gene-engineered cells into the patient, it will cure
the disease," Anderson said by phone. "That is very important and therefore this
is a very exciting paper."

   Anderson was the first to try genetic engineering to cure the ADA, or
adenosine deaminase, form of severe combined immunodeficiency disorder, or SCID.

LOAD-DATE: June 28, 2002


                              286 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2002 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                       June 28, 2002 Friday Final Edition

SECTION: CANADA & WORLD; Pg. B04

LENGTH: 1116 words

HEADLINE: Bursting the bubble; The technique is risky and experimental, and the
jargon is difficult and medical sounding, but a radiant two-year-old girl from
Jerusalem named Salsabil is giving doctors the world over confidence that gene
therapy may yet live up to the incredible promise that heralded its first
attempt 12 years ago.

SOURCE: The Independent, London

BYLINE: Steve Connor

BODY:

   Her name is Salsabil. She is an Arab-Israeli from Jerusalem.

   Her survival is living testament to the growing realization that gene therapy
may have come of age after many years of false hopes.

   Doctors throughout the world are growing increasingly confident about the
future of gene therapy, a technique where "healthy" genes are injected into a
patient to replace their defective DNA.

   Salsabil was born in February 2000 into a family with a history of the SCID
gene disorder.

   One of her siblings had died of the disease and an older sister, Tasmin, had
survived only after a transplant of blood cells from the umbilical cord of a
younger, unaffected brother.

   Unfortunately for Salsabil, there were no suitable donors for either a
bone-marrow transplant or for stem cells from the umbilical cord blood. At seven
months of age doctors decided gene therapy was the only option.

   The team was led by Professor Shimon Slavin, Shoshana Morecki and Memet Akar
of the Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical Centre in Jerusalem. They worked with
Claudio Bordignon and colleagues at the San Raffaele Institute for Gene Therapy
in Milan.

   Israeli surgeons extracted bone marrow from Salsabil and mingled the cells
with a genetically engineered virus containing a healthy copy of the affected
gene.

   The virus, engineered to be harmless, automatically injects the human gene
directly into the nucleus of the bone-marrow cells.

   Before the doctors transfused the bone marrow back into Salsabil, they
performed a radical procedure to increase the chances of the technique working.
They subjected Salsabil to a mild form of chemotherapy -- called
non-myeloblative conditioning -- to suppress her defective bone marrow cells and
prepare the ground for the transfused cells to multiply.

   Bordignon said yesterday: "Non-myeloblative conditioning means you don't
really wipe out the bone marrow, you just give one of the drugs used for a
transplant, at a much lower dose, to make 'space' for engineered marrow to
seize, expand and grow better."

   It worked. Within weeks of having a transfusion of her own marrow, Salsabil
began to show signs of recovery.

   The infused stem cells migrated naturally to her bone marrow and began making
several of the key cells of the immune system, such as the white blood cells
known as B and T lymphocytes. Within months, Salsabil began making her own
antibodies for the first time, when before she had to rely on those in her
mother's milk. She responded normally to a tetanus vaccine and even survived
chickenpox.

   Within a year she had shrugged off the respiratory infections, chronic
diarrhea and scabies that had plagued her since birth. She was allowed home and
needed no treatment. She was effectively cured of a disease written in her
genes.

   "I would call this a cure," Slavin said. "We have achieved 100-per-cent
replacement of her defective bone marrow cells. She is a cute little girl. The
concept can be applied to all genetic diseases where there is a need to engineer
stem cells to produce normal products, especially when patients have no matched
donor available for safe bone marrow transplantation."

   It is not the first time that doctors have cured SCID children with gene
therapy, but it is the first time a child has been cured of such a complex form
of the disease.

   Salsabil suffered from a lack of an enzyme called adenosine deaminase (ADA),
which results in a number of abnormalities of the immune system and is
considered the most complex and most difficult SCID to treat.

   W. French Anderson of the University of Southern California, who was the
first to try to treat ADA deficiency by gene therapy, said yesterday the
Italian-Israeli study was an important advance for the entire concept of gene
therapy.

   "This gives a boost to the whole field because it proves our basic premise,
that if you can get enough gene-engineered cells into the patient it will cure
the disease," he said. "That is very important and this is very exciting."

   It was not always so. After the initial hype that heralded the first gene
therapy attempt by Anderson in 1990, the prognosis did not look good.

   Gene therapy alone did not cure in the way it was meant to and two little
girls -- Ashanthi deSilva and Carly Todd, the first gene therapy patients in
America and Britain respectively -- had to rely on more conventional treatment
to survive.

   "There was initially a great burst of enthusiasm that lasted three, four
years where a couple of hundred trials got started all over the world," Anderson
said.

   "Then we realized that nothing was really working at the clinical level." The
worst moment came in September 1999 when an American patient called Jesse
Gelsinger died after a gene therapy injection into his liver.

   No one knows why he died, but it may have been linked to the virus used in
the experimental procedure.

   Scientists had to redouble their efforts to ensure the safety of any viruses
used in the many and varied trials, which included attempts at treating cancer
with genetically modified cells as well as treatments for some of the 4,000 or
so inherited disorders caused by a single defective gene, from cystic fibrosis
to haemophilia.

   Finally, in April 2000, scientists in France reported their first unequivocal
success with gene therapy -- on children with another form of SCID.

   This year, doctors at the Institute of Child Health at Great Ormond Street
Hospital in London reported similar success on an 18-month-old called Rhys Evans
who had an SCID caused by a defect in the "gamma c" gene.

   Today Rhys is a healthy two-year-old with no signs of the inherited disorder
that had confined him to a solitary antiseptic hospital room.

   Like Salsabil, he mixes freely with other children -- an activity that might
have killed them both before the treatment -- and he now lives the normal life
of any toddler.

   Adrian Thrasher, the consultant immunologist at Great Ormond Street who
treated Rhys, said the research from Jerusalem was very encouraging for the
treatment of immunodeficiency by gene therapy. He hopes the treatment may now be
extended to cover other inherited illnesses.

   "There are more than 4,000 genetic conditions, and at least 80 different
immune diseases alone," he said. "The technique will have to be worked out for
each individual condition."

   Treating diseased cells in the bone marrow is technically easier than
treating the defective genes of, say, nerve tissue or heart muscle.

   Although gene therapy has now proved effective in curing one or two diseases,
nobody can yet be sure that such treatment can be made to work in each of the
thousands of genetic disorders affecting children.

GRAPHIC: Photo: Hamilton Spectator Wire Services; David Vetter of Houston spent
all 12 years of his life breathing filtered air in an antiseptic plastic bubble.
He died in 1984, when doctors tried a bone marrow transplant. Recent success in
gene therapy lends new hope for such cases.

LOAD-DATE: June 28, 2002


                              291 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2002 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                     June 12, 2002 Wednesday Final Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D07

LENGTH: 805 words

HEADLINE: City seeks biotech investment; Hamilton seen as strong in sciences

SOURCE: The Hamilton Spectator

BYLINE: Mike Pettapiece

BODY:

   Hamilton is making a pitch to global venture capitalists to think of the city
when they invest their biotechnology money.

   A Hamilton delegation is on an Ontario panel that meets with venture funds
investors tomorrow in Toronto.

   The meeting follows a biotech summit this week of 15,000 delegates from
around the world. Bio 2002 drew scientists, policy makers, venture capitalists
and others to the three-day conference.

   Ontario has set a goal of making the province the third-largest home of
biotechnology industry in North America. The province sees Hamilton as one of
several hubs in an emerging biotech corridor in the province.

   And the city hopes to gain government and private sector funds to leverage
the health-research riches already here. In particular, the city can offer the
biosciences, engineering and information technology strengths of McMaster
University.

   "The people who get that right are going to be the next money winners," said
Jack Gauldie. He is chair of the department of pathology and molecular medicine
at the university.

   Gauldie will be among Hamilton representatives who will get a chance to talk
to venture capitalists. Ontario added the VC forum as part of the Bio 2002
conference.

   Hamilton did not have a large presence at this year's biotech summit. But the
city expects to have an official delegation at the conference next year.

   Gauldie, also director of the Centre for Gene Therapeutics at the university,
said he and others will pitch the city as a good place to invest. The appearance
comes as biotech initiatives are becoming a virtual nerve centre of activity in
Hamilton.

   "Hamilton definitely has to seize this as a way to change the nature of the
economy in the city," he said. "This (the venture forum) will be an opportunity
for us to highlight a few things."

   The city has just drafted a $100,000 bioscience profile, a kind of directory
of the current state of the sector -- including the huge research-spinoff
potential at McMaster and local hospitals.

   A biotech council is being formed. The university has a symposium set for
late June, and a business plan is in the works for a biotech incubator plan,
likely to be sited at McMaster.

   Hamilton and McMaster are also working jointly with counterparts in Guelph,
which has its own food-science and agricultural strengths. Their co-operation
would marry the strengths of both communities.

   Farther out on the horizon for Hamilton is an innovation park, perhaps
somewhere in the airport area.

   Mamdouh Shoukri, university vice-president of research and international
affairs, said the city realizes it is moving at an opportune time.

   "We're looking at creating wealth through research ... because this is
becoming a (senior governments) priority. All of a sudden, everybody seems to be
intersecting at this point."

   Industry Minister Allan Rock, for example, announced a $200-million biofund
this week to help entrepreneurial life sciences companies.

   Today, Maryland-based technology consultant Vernon George will talk to city
and university officials about biotech in Hamilton. George, who was at the
Toronto conference, was retained by the province to help foster bioscience
strategies in Ontario.

   Later this month, Joseph Rotman, head of the province's biocouncil, and other
biocouncil members will be at a biotech symposium here. The Rotman School of
Management at the University of Toronto bears the name of this entrepreneur and
philanthropist.

   Economic development officer Dorothy Redfearn agrees Hamilton is only at the
start of its journey.

   "There are not a lot of biotech companies (here). However, we have the
inherent strengths to develop those companies. I would say that, behind the
scenes, we are quietly incubating this cluster."

   The city's just-drafted bioscience profile is a bid to create a presence of
that sector in the city. The idea, said Redfearn, is to have everyone "talking
as a Hamilton group instead of in their individual workplaces."

   The health and biotechnology sector is one of six targeted by the city for
tomorrow's growth. The city selected these clusters, based on their economic
potential and on strengths Hamilton already has in these areas.

   Biotechnology is the generic term that covers a number of leading-edge
scientific areas. They can include research and development of biomedical
products, such as artificial organs, drug delivery systems, and biomaterials.

   The field is huge and involves some exotic technologies.

   Nanobiotechnology, for instance, is the science of building devices at the
molecular scale. The micro-manipulation level underlies the science of genomics
-- the study of the relationship between gene structure and biological function
in organisms.

   You can contact Mike Pettapiece at mpettapiece@hamiltonspectator.com or at
905-526-3283.

GRAPHIC: Photo: J.P. Moczulski, the Canadian Press; Exhibitor walks past a
display at the Bio 2002 biotechnology trade show in Toronto which drew delegates
from around the world.

LOAD-DATE: June 12, 2002


                              294 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2002 Sun Media Corporation
                                The Toronto Sun

                      May 18, 2002 Saturday, Final Edition

SECTION: News; Pg. 66

LENGTH: 312 words

HEADLINE: HOSPITAL GETS $4M BOOST;
GIFT LAUNCHES ST. MIKE'S FUNDRAISER

BYLINE: SHARON LEM, TORONTO SUN

BODY:

   The late Col. Samuel McLaughlin made his money selling cars, but yesterday he
made a huge dent by donating $4 million to launch St. Michael's Hospital's
research and capital campaign.

   The R. Samuel McLaughlin Foundation's gift is the second-largest donation in
St. Mike's 110-year history.

   "Sam McLaughlin was one of Canada's greatest industrialists, sportsmen and
philanthropists. He wanted everyone to share in his good fortune," Christopher
Wansbrough, chairman of the R. Samuel McLaughlin Foundation Board of Trustees,
said.

   "We are deeply honoured to receive this gift today," said Jeff Lozon,
president and CEO of St. Michael's Hospital.

   The donation will be used to support research with a special focus on
critical-care and inner city health issues such as homelessness, poverty,
HIV/AIDS, addiction and mental illness.
   'PERFECT FIT'
 "As an inner city hospital, a regional trauma facility and a centre for
critical care, many of the patients we serve are vulnerable on both counts.
Choosing to focus on these areas is a perfect fit," said Dr. Arthur Slutsky, St.
Mike's vice-president of research.

   Heart disease patient Michael Salem, 56, of Thornhill, has a first-hand
understanding of the importance of research through his participation in cardiac
gene therapy clinical trials at the hospital.

   "It's very depressing to be in a situation where you have no hope. Bypass was
no longer an option for me so when my cardiologist suggested gene therapy -- it
gave me back hope," Salem said yesterday. "Research like this has to continue
because it is hope for our future generations.

   "My father died at age 54 of the same heart disease I have. I'm convinced
gene therapy has made the difference. Without this research, people like my two
sons and future generations won't be able to benefit."

   To donate to the campaign, call 416-864-5000.

LOAD-DATE: May 19, 2002


                              304 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2002 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                      April 26, 2002 Friday Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A03

LENGTH: 821 words

HEADLINE: Mac OKs giant addition; New health sciences building means more
hospital and teaching space. It may also mean an explosion of new jobs in
biotechnology for Hamilton.

SOURCE: The Hamilton Spectator

BYLINE: Christine Cox and Suzanne Morrison

BODY:

   A new $60.5-million health sciences building at McMaster University is
expected to catapult Hamilton into a major biotechnology centre.

   The university's board of governors gave the green light to the proposed
expansion yesterday.

   The project is expected to get under way in the next few months and be
completed by September 2004.

   Dr. John Kelton, dean of the faculty of health sciences, said the expansion
will mean McMaster is not just the best teaching university "but surrounding all
of it will be spinoff biotechnology industries that will be wonderful for the
city. And we're going to start it right there."

   He envisions the building will turn McMaster into the Harvard of the North.
Harvard University's innovative discoveries have led to the development of high
tech and biotechnology industries throughout the Massachusetts area.

   All of this is great news to Neil Everson, executive director of economic
development for Hamilton.

   "This is extremely good news," he said. "One of the areas we are really
trying to drive is the health and biotechnology sectors."

   Tentatively planned is a five-storey building that will extend from the back
of the current health sciences centre into the university. On the first floor
there will be large, innovative classrooms with electronic links that can be
used by the university and health sciences.

   The second floor will be hospital space, linked to McMaster University
Medical Centre (MUMC) by a bridge. On this floor a separate pediatric intensive
care unit will be developed, along with other services.

   A series of classrooms, meeting rooms and research rooms will occupy the
third floor -- all tied to different aspects of health sciences: the medical
school, nursing school, rehabilitation sciences and midwifery -- for both
undergraduate and postgraduate students.

   The Centre for Molecular Medicine and Health, research incubator space and
laboratories will occupy the fourth and fifth floors.

   This will also be home to the Centre for Gene Therapeutics, which is now
shoehorned into many different areas and floors of the current building.

   "This is going to be where we are going to be able to develop
state-of-the-art gene transfer treatments," Kelton said.

   "With all of the things you're reading about where genes are being
investigated for use in Parkinson's disease, cancer and other diseases," Kelton
said, "we will have a huge series of laboratories based there that will be
physically linked with the university, our industrial biotechnology strategy and
patients because they are the reason all of us are here."

   Kelton said the building will be a beautiful structure and should become a
legacy for the university that the people of Hamilton will be proud of.

   "We think this is the start of transforming Hamilton with biotechnology," he
said.

   Kelton said all of this is happening because of university president Peter
George's grand vision to make McMaster into a world class university.

   Health sciences at McMaster have undergone major changes. There have been
dramatic changes in its nursing program, and its medical program will be up to
140 students by this summer -- the second largest program in Ontario.

   Kelton said the faculty has the critical mass of students, educators,
researchers and physicians.

   "Where we have been lagging is in a physical plant to put it all together,
and linked to a strategy that says we make major discoveries and educate our
students and the world about them. The last part, which we haven't done like
Harvard and Duke universities, is to take those major discoveries and
commercialize them."

   In the middle of the new building there will be laboratories where McMaster
scientists will have the opportunity to commercialize their discoveries with
backing from the university.

   "Harvard is wonderful because of its name, its dominance and pre-eminence,"
Kelton said. "But it has also developed a series of interlocking biotechnology
industries around it. That's where we're interested in taking McMaster."

   The proposed project will total 24,750 square metres.

   About $16.1 million of the total cost will be covered by the Canada
Foundation for Innovation and other agencies. SuperBuild funding accounts for
another $3.9 million, and Hamilton Health Sciences' contribution will be $7.8
million, funds that will come from its Chedoke Foundation.

   That means the university has to find $32.7 million. Fundraising plans are
being developed to address $28.7 million of that. McMaster is talking to the
city, the province, and private partners about funding the remaining $4 million
for research incubator space.

   Architect Norr Ltd. has done preliminary design work on the project.

   You can contact Christine Cox at ccox@hamiltonspectator.com or at
905-526-3323.

   You can contact Suzanne Morrison at smorrison@hamiltonspectator.com or at
905-526-3474.

LOAD-DATE: April 26, 2002


                              324 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2001 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                     November 30, 2001 Friday Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A10

LENGTH: 581 words

HEADLINE: Mac helps build Canada; Grant will fund research into human cells and
quest to make new drugs

SOURCE: The Hamilton Spectator

BYLINE: Christine Cox

BODY:

   Industry minister Brian Tobin says Canadians must tear themselves away from
the events of Sept. 11 and refocus on building Canada's future.

   Tobin was at McMaster University yesterday to announce $98 million in funding
to support the establishment of new Canada Research Chairs at 34 universities
across the country. Two of those chairs go to McMaster.

   Tobin stressed the government's commitment to investing in knowledge,
research and development. He said that despite the need to counter terrorism,
the government must not allow itself to be swayed from its own agenda and
long-term plan.

   The only possible success for terrorists, Tobin said, is to make people
fearful of each other, fearful of the future and fearful of planning ahead.

   McMaster has now been awarded 28 Canada Research Chairs, representing a total
of $31.2 million. University president Peter George said McMaster has already
seen a marked difference in the recruitment and retention of outstanding faculty
members.

   Each of the two latest research chairs provides $500,000 over five years.
Tied in with this is an additional $407,000 in infrastructure funding from the
Canada Foundation for Innovation, which handed out $19.6 million nationally.

   One of McMaster's two newest research chairs goes to molecular biophysicist
Cecile Fradin, who will fly here from her native France next week to take up a
post as assistant professor in the physics and astronomy department. Fradin, 29,
has just completed two years of post-doctoral studies at the Weizmann Institute
of Science in Israel.

   Department chair John Berlinsky says the Canada Research Chair is what
enabled McMaster to lure the "extremely talented" Fradin.

   "That's how we're recruiting people from abroad," Berlinsky said, adding that
the research chair recipients automatically get work permits.

   Fradin studies the motion of large molecules such as proteins as they pass
through cell pores. Learning how these big molecules go into cells is
significant because it might allow scientists to control that process, which is
important for gene therapies.

   Some cells that don't die when they're supposed to become tumours. If cells
die when they shouldn't, that can lead to problems such as strokes. That's why
it's important to understand the mechanism behind cell death.

   The second McMaster chair is for John Brennan, 36, associate professor,
bioanalytical chemistry. He said it means he can devote more time to research
because he's getting partial relief from his teaching obligations.

   Brennan's research has two major applications. One has to do with the
development of biosensors that could play a role in monitoring diseases and the
environment.

   The other relates to high-throughput screening, a way of screening thousands
of chemical compounds in the quest to develop new drugs. Tobin toured McMaster's
high-throughput screening laboratory, the only lab of its kind in Canada.

   Earlier yesterday, David Strangway, president of the Canada Foundation for
Innovation, and Rene Durocher, executive director of the Canada Research Chairs
program, accompanied a group of McMaster leaders who met with The Spectator's
editorial board to talk about the importance of the federal innovation programs.
The goal is to make Canada one of the world's top five countries in research and
development by 2010.

   You can contact Christine Cox by e-mail at ccox@hamiltonspectator.com or by
telephone at 905-526-3323.

GRAPHIC: Photo: Barry Gray, the Hamilton Spectator; Federal Industry Minister
Brian Tobin gets a tour of McMaster's biochemistry department. He said Canada
needs innovation and research.

LOAD-DATE: January 1, 2002


                              325 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2001 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                    November 22, 2001 Thursday Final Edition

SECTION: CANADA & WORLD; Pg. B08

LENGTH: 353 words

HEADLINE: Medical 'con' triggers cancer self-destruction

SOURCE: The Independent, London

BYLINE: Steve Connor

BODY:

   Scientists have performed a "con trick" on cancer by persuading tumour cells
to self- destruct after treatment with a new form of gene therapy.

   The researchers said that the technique was a potential breakthrough in
cancer treatment, which could be applied to many types of tumour that were
currently difficult or impossible to treat.

   Although the scientists have so far only done the research in the test tube,
they believe that early results show that it could become a powerful new tool
for treating cancer within five to 10 years.

   Gene therapy, in which genes are manipulated to treat a medical condition, is
still in its infancy but the Glasgow University team believes that the first
clinical trials on cancer patients using the new technique could begin within
two years.

   "I feel very strongly that our research represents a potential breakthrough,
with implications for the treatment of a variety of common cancers," said Dr.
Nicol Keith, who led the team from the Cancer Research Campaign's Beatson
Laboratories in Glasgow.

   "People have discussed similar kinds of gene therapy systems before, but
we've now made significant progress by moving from talking about the theory to
actually killing cancer cells in a very efficient manner," Keith said.

   The research, published today in the journal Oncogene, involves introducing a
gene into cancer cells that has the effect of switching on another gene that
kills the cell. Ordinary cells are left untouched because the introduced gene
contains a genetic switch that is only usually turned on in cancer cells.

   "With a bit of genetic trickery, we've managed to fool cancer cells to their
doom without harming normal cells. I'm optimistic that we could soon have
targeted treatments that spare cancer patients the side-effects that many suffer
today," Keith said.

   Cancer cells are known to switch on a gene called telomerase, which causes
the cells to replicate uncontrollably. By attaching the switch for telomerase to
a cancer toxin gene called nitroreductase, the scientists can selectively kill
tumour cells without harming healthy tissue.

LOAD-DATE: January 1, 2002


                              333 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2001 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                    September 6, 2001 Thursday Final Edition

SECTION: CANADA & WORLD; Pg. B01

LENGTH: 486 words

HEADLINE: Health research gets $20-million boost; Province directs $4.5m for
diagnosing and treating breast cancer

SOURCE: Torstar News Service

BYLINE: Theresa Boyle

DATELINE: TORONTO

BODY:

   The province is pouring $20 million into health research with $4.5 million of
it earmarked for advancements in diagnosing and treating breast cancer.

   The money will help support research infrastructure and provide training
opportunities for health science researchers at five Toronto health
institutions, Energy, Science and Technology Minister Jim Wilson yesterday told
a news conference at the Sunnybrook and Women's College Health Sciences Centre.

   "Health sciences research is our most powerful weapon against
life-threatening illnesses such as cancer," he said.

   Sunnybrook's breast cancer research centre is getting $4.5 million to support
work being done to improve early detection, obtain more informative diagnoses
and improve surgical therapy.

   "They'll use the money to learn more about the biology and molecular causes
of breast cancer," Wilson said. "That means earlier, more accurate detection.
And that means more women will have a chance of surviving this terrible
illness," he added.

   Dr. Kathleen Pritchard, principal researcher at the breast cancer research
centre, said part of the money will be used for a clinical trial, comparing the
accuracy of digital versus film-screen mammography in 2,500 patients. Some of
the funding will also support the development of surgical techniques to remove
breast cancer tumours while avoiding full mastectomies and the need for
follow-up surgery, she noted.

   Pritchard said it's gratifying for her to see that such research can give
patients more hope.

   "I came this morning before this meeting from seeing a young woman in her 40s
who probably has a 60 or 70 per cent chance of having a breast cancer recur in
the next five years," she told reporters.

   "I was able to tell her that, based on clinical trials we carried out ... we
can now reduce (the risk) to about 30 per cent.

   "And I was able to talk to her about a new trial that perhaps ... will reduce
the risk even more," Pritchard added.

   Sunnybrook is getting an additional $1.3 million to assist in a separate
project aimed at developing and maintaining a data resource centre for health
research.

   Also targeted for research funding are:

   * The Hospital for Sick Children, which will receive $5.2 million to support
genetic research.

   * The University Health Network, which will get $5 million to renovate. It
can also use some of the funds to acquire new equipment for its Clinical
Genomics Centre.

   * The Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute, which is being given $1.9 million
got biorobotic research.

   * St. Michael's Hospital, which will receive $1.7 million for a
cardiovascular gene therapy initiative.

   "These investments will enable our researchers to achieve the highest levels
of excellence and help position Toronto's hospitals as global leaders in health
science research," said Dr. David McCutheon, president of Sunnybrook.

LOAD-DATE: November 5, 2001


                              336 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2001 Sun Media Corporation
                         Edmonton Sun (Alberta, Canada)

                     August 20, 2001 Monday, Final Edition

SECTION: Editorial/Opinion; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 623 words

HEADLINE: STEM CELL RESEARCH GETS REALLY GOOD NEWS

BYLINE: MARIANNE MEED-WARD, TORONTO SUN

DATELINE: TORONTO

BODY:

   Finally, some good news on the stem cell research front, and I'm not talking
about President George Bush's limits on said research.

   The good news comes from McGill University in Montreal where researchers have
developed a way to harvest stem cells from skin, instead of the much more
controversial source - human embryos.

   If stem cell development is possible without using embryos, we will have
arrived at the "have it all" stage. We'll get all the benefits of stem cells
without the wrenching ethical difficulties.

   First, the benefits. Stem cells are the equivalent of a fresh lump of clay:
If you get them early enough - before they start to develop into legs and arms
and organs - you can shape them into any body part you like. For example, you
can coax them to become skin cells for burn victims. Or insulin-producing cells
for diabetics. Or brain cells for Alzheimer's and Parkinson's patients. Or nerve
cells for para- and quadriplegics or MS sufferers. And so on. Stem cells provide
the hope of a cure for many ailments that, at the moment, we can only alleviate.

   Now, the ethical challenges. Until recently, stem cells were believed
available only in newly fertilized embryos. That's why people who believe life
begins at conception oppose stem cell research. You're essentially killing one
life to save another.

   Most of us have a hard time treating a lump of cells we can't see that live
in a Petri dish or a cold-storage unit as the equivalent of our beloved kin.

   Consider for a moment where most stem cells come from - unused embryos from
fertility treatments and aborted fetuses.

   Let's look at unused embryos. They were created to become a child for an
infertile couple. Like the embryo or embryos belonging to Celine Dion and her
husband that sit in a freezer in the U.S. But for the luck of the draw, these
embryos could have become the couple's new baby.

   Celine has reportedly promised her mom, a devout Catholic, that she'll
retrieve these embryos when she decides to have another baby. But what if Dion
gets hit by a bus on the way to the clinic? The embryos would likely be
destroyed. And people will pretend they weren't human in the first place.

   Now, let's look at aborted fetuses. The whole reason they're being aborted is
that they will, if left alone, develop into a baby, something the pregnant mom
obviously doesn't want. Once again, to assuage guilt, we'll pretend these cells
aren't human.

   The embryo is a baby if I want it to be (as in, "I'm childless, implant me"),
but it's not if I don't (as in, "I'm with child, unplant me"). Hmmm.

   Which brings us to the big compromise. Bush will allow stem cell research on
cells that already exist, but forbids the creation of new ones. Same idea in
draft legislation introduced by Health Minister Allan Rock in May. The bill
would prohibit creating embryos solely for research, but would allow using
leftover embryos from fertility treatments.

   Which makes me ask: Why do we have leftovers? No matter why or when they were
created, these embryos are just as human as the next set of fertilized eggs. On
the other hand, if you're comfortable destroying fertilized eggs at all, what
difference does it make that the eggs are purposely created or left over?

   Which is why the big compromise is a big delusion. Bush has pledged $250
million for research into stem cells derived from other sources, such as the
bone marrow, blood and brain cells of adults, and the umbilical cord and
placenta normally discarded after birth. That's the right approach.

   Here at home, $7 million in research is earmarked for the centre for stem
cell and gene therapy research being built in Ottawa. Let's hope it, too, uses
the money in looking for alternatives.

NOTES:
Marianne Meed Ward is a Sun Media columnist based in Toronto

LOAD-DATE: August 20, 2001


                              337 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2001 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                      August 20, 2001 Monday Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 910 words

HEADLINE: Mac's medical researchers among best

SOURCE: The Hamilton Spectator

BYLINE: Suzanne Morrison, Medical Research Reporter

BODY:

   In the space of one week, a Hamilton scientist received the highest award the
Canadian Medical Association can bestow, another unveiled a potential step
toward healing spinal cord injuries, and local researchers published landmark
studies on new ways to treat heart patients in two of the world's most
prestigious medical journals.

   Not bad for a city people call Steeltown.

   If Hamilton's past was built on steel, its future economic development will
increasingly focus on medical research and medical services.

   Hamilton boasts some of the best medical researchers in the world, and
everybody knows it -- except their neighbours.

   A few years ago, Dr. John Kelton, the new dean and vice-president of the
faculty of health sciences at McMaster University, said "many, many patients
come directly to Hamilton from the United States and Europe -- and some from
Asia -- to seek out one of the physicians because of their international
reputation. It happens every week.

   "McMaster is a well-kept secret," he added, "but mostly to the people of
Hamilton."

   The roots of Hamilton's international reputation as a superstar in health
research go back to the 1960s when innovative thinkers who didn't like the way
doctors were trained decided to create a medical school with a difference.

   One of the founders was Dr. Fraser Mustard, who was the first scientist to
discover Aspirin could save the lives of heart patients by preventing clots from
forming.

   As the new medical school's founding chairman of pathology and the second
dean and vice-president of the faculty of health sciences, he was one of the
architects of its novel problem-based small-group learning philosophy.

   This teaching approach pioneered at McMaster has become standard around the
world.

   For this, and many other achievements, the Canadian Medical Association (CMA)
awarded Mustard its 2001 Frederic Newton Gisborne Starr Award last week at its
annual meeting in Quebec City. The award has been described as the Victoria
Cross of Canadian medicine. It was first given in 1936 to the Canadian
discoverers of insulin: Sir Frederick Banting, Dr. Charles Best and Dr. James
Collip.

   Over the decades, others built on the achievements of Mustard and his
colleagues.

   Seven years ago, international thrombosis expert Dr. Jack Hirsh founded the
Hamilton Civic Hospitals Research Centre, now the Henderson Research Centre,
which is regarded as one of the leading medical research institutions in the
world.

   For his pioneering contributions to our understanding and diagnosis and
prevention of blood clots in leg veins and pulmonary arteries, Hirsh has been
awarded the Order of Canada, named to the Canadian Medical Hall of Fame, and
last year was the only Canadian among the five recipients of the prestigious
Gairdner Foundation international awards.

   Earlier this year, Hamilton cardiologist Dr. Salim Yusuf received the Prix
Galien Canada 2001 research award, the pharmaceutical industry's equivalent of
the Nobel Prize, for his research, which is making a major difference in the
lives of heart patients.

   One of the greatest accolades Yusuf received during his 25-year research
career was for a clinical trial called HOPE (Heart Outcomes Prevention
Evaluation), which he conceived and led from Hamilton in 19 countries, testing
the effects of the drug ramipril and vitamin E in reducing heart attacks and
strokes. The trial showed patients clearly benefited from ramipril, and the
discovery was named one of the top 10 of 1999.

   Last week in the prestigious New England Journal of Medicine, Yusuf published
more results that showed dramatic benefits to heart patients when the
anti-clotting drug clopidogrel is combined with Aspirin in another study called
CURE (Clopidogrel in Unstable Angina to Prevent Recurrent Ischemic Events).

   Some of the world's best asthma experts are right in our own back yard, at
the Firestone Institute for Respiratory Health, where they continue to unravel
the mystery of a troubling disease.

   Last April, Dr. Malcolm Sears released a study that documented that asthma
rates in adults in Hamilton are among the highest in Canada. At the moment,
Sears and epidemiologist Dr. Neil Johnston are within weeks of launching the
first study in the world that will try to discover why asthma peaks in the third
week of September everywhere in the Northern Hemisphere.

   Most recently, Dr. Michel Rathbone made headlines across Canada for his
research on spinal cord injuries. Rathbone and researchers in his laboratory at
McMaster University found nerves can successfully regenerate in the spine when
enteric glia cells from the intestine are transplanted into the spinal cord.

   If Hamilton researchers have had a glorious past, those in the know say to
watch out for the future because it will be nothing short of spectacular.

   Marie Townsend, administrator of research programs in the faculty of health
sciences at McMaster University, said the plan in Hamilton is to build on
research strengths of the past to springboard into the future.

   What that means is local scientists will be turning up in the news with
answers for everything from blood disorders, heart disease, asthma and
intestinal disorders to gene therapy work, coupled with innovative ways of
helping doctors keep up with the explosion of new information in medicine.

   You can reach Suzanne Morrison by e-mail at smorrison@hamiltonspectator.com
or by calling 905-526-3474.

GRAPHIC: Photo: File Photo, the Hamilton Spectator; Dr. Malcolm Sears will soon
launch a study to determine why asthma peaks in the third week of September
everywhere in the Northern Hemisphere. He is one of many renowned medical
researchers working in Hamilton.

LOAD-DATE: November 5, 2001


                              340 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2001 Sun Media Corporation
                                The Toronto Sun

                    August 15, 2001 Wednesday, Final Edition

SECTION: Editorial/Opinion; Pg. 15; Ethics

LENGTH: 678 words

HEADLINE: STORM OVER STEM CELLS;
RESEARCH POSES A REAL MORAL AND ETHICAL DILEMMA

BYLINE: MARIANNE MEED WARD

BODY:

   Finally, some good news on the stem cell research front - and I'm not talking
about U.S. President George Bush's strict limits on said research.

   The good news comes from McGill University, where researchers have developed
a way to harvest stem cells from skin, instead of the much more controversial
source: human embryos.

   If stem cell development is possible without using embryos, we will have
arrived at the "have it all" stage. We'll get all the benefits of stem cells
(and there are many) without the wrenching ethical difficulties (there are many
of those, too).

   First, the benefits. Stem cells are the equivalent of a fresh lump of clay:
if you get them early enough - before they start to develop into legs and arms
and organs - you can shape them into any body part you like. So, for example,
you can coax them to become skin cells for burn victims. Or insulin-producing
cells for diabetics. Or brain cells for Alzheimer's and Parkinson's patients. Or
nerve cells for para- and quadriplegics. And so on. Stem cells provide the hope
of a cure for many ailments that, at the moment, we can only treat.

   Now, the ethical difficulties. Until recently, stem cells were believed
available only in newly fertilized embryos - you know, those things that given
love, nourishment and an unmolested nine months in the womb, grow up to be Suzy
and Johnny. That's why people who believe life begins at conception are opposed
to stem cell research. You're essentially killing one life to save another.
   LUMP IN A PETRI DISH
 Most of us, though, have a hard time treating a lump of cells we can't see that
reside in a Petri dish or a cold storage unit as the equivalent of our beloved
Tom, Dick or Mary. But they are.

   Consider for a moment where most stem cells come from: unused embryos from
fertility treatments and aborted fetuses.

   Let's look at unused embryos. They were created specifically to become a
child for an otherwise infertile couple. Like, for example, the embryo or
embryos belonging to Celine Dion and her husband that sit in a freezer somewhere
in the U.S. But for the luck of the draw, these embryos could have become the
couple's new baby.

   Celine has reportedly promised her mother, a devout Catholic, that she'll
retrieve these embryos when she decides to have another baby. But what if Celine
gets hit by a bus on the way to the clinic? The embryos would likely be
destroyed. And people will pretend they weren't human in the first place.

   Now, let's look at aborted fetuses. The whole reason they're being aborted is
that they will, if left alone, develop into a baby, something the pregnant mom
obviously doesn't want. And, once again, to assuage guilt, we'll pretend these
cells aren't human. What a difference nine months makes.

   The embryo is a baby if I want it to be (as in: "I'm childless, implant me"),
but it's not if I don't (as in: "I'm with child, unplant me"). Hmmm.

   Which brings us to the Big Compromise. Bush will allow stem cell research on
cells that already exist, but forbids the creation of new ones. Same idea in
draft legislation introduced by Health Minister Allan Rock in May. The bill
would prohibit creating embryos solely for research, but would allow using
leftover embryos from fertility treatments.

   Which makes me ask: why do we have leftovers? No matter why or when they were
created, these embryos are just as human as the next set of fertilized eggs. On
the other hand, if you're comfortable destroying fertilized eggs at all, what
difference does it make if they are purposely created or left over?

   Which is why the Big Compromise is a Big Delusion.

   Bush has pledged $250 million for research into stem cells derived from other
sources, such as the bone marrow, blood and brain cells of adults, and the
umbilical cord and placenta normally discarded after birth. That's the right
approach.

   Here at home, $7 million in research is earmarked for the Centre for Stem
Cell and Gene Therapy Research being built in Ottawa. Let's hope it, too, uses
the money lto look for alternatives.

LOAD-DATE: August 15, 2001


                              347 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2001 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                      June 23, 2001 Saturday Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A05

LENGTH: 794 words

HEADLINE: Mac MD studies rare disorder; Doctor offers hope to parents of
sickchildren

SOURCE: The Hamilton Spectator

BYLINE: Suzanne Morrison, Medical Research Reporter

BODY:

   Two little boys -- one Canadian, one American -- born two weeks apart, share
the same rare inherited genetic disorder.

   About two years ago, Tyler Huneault and Alex Skojec were diagnosed with
Sialidosis -- a disease that's so rare it's not listed in medical dictionaries
-- and their parents struggled alone searching for information on a strange
disorder they knew nothing about.

   Right away, they hit the Internet.

   That's how Ottawa dental hygienist Ida Ryan and her husband Perry Huneault, a
CPR track maintenance foreman, first met psychologist Bill Skojec of Hyde Park,
N.Y.

   There the families discovered McMaster University molecular geneticist Dr.
Suleiman Igdoura. He is thought to be the only scientist in the world devoting
most of his time to researching the disorder that afflicts Tyler and Alex.

   The families sent cell samples from their children to Igdoura for analysis in
his McMaster laboratory and they've all talked back and forth over the Net for
more than a year.

   But, they'd never met face to face. Until yesterday.

   The two families walked into the Life Sciences building at McMaster to meet
the doctor who is trying to find answers that might let the boys live normal
lives.

   The meeting was a rare moment in science circles. Normally, researchers work
alone in the isolation of their laboratory and leave it up to doctors to
communicate and talk with families.

   Igdoura, who knows what the two families are going through, doesn't think
that way. "It's important for us (as researchers) to do this because it's the
human part of things that we don't often see in labs."

   For Skojec, the meeting was "very inspirational. It's what I've been seeking
the whole time," he said. "The reason I came up to McMaster was primarily to
meet Dr. Igdoura because at a time when everyone else was telling me there was
no hope, he gave me a glimmer of hope."

   Ryan headed back to Ottawa yesterday feeling just great.

   "I've got a whole lab working on Tyler's disease. Up until this point, I've
had doctors telling me that they weren't sure."

   Sialidosis is a rare inherited metabolic disorder characterized by a
deficiency of an enzyme (alpha-neuraminidase). It belongs to a group of
disorders known as Lysosomal Storage Diseases.

   There is a mild form which begins in adolescence and a more severe form that
can be present at birth or occur anytime in infancy.

   In the milder version, symptoms may include involuntary muscle contractions,
red spots in the eyes, an inability to co-ordinate movement, tremors, impaired
vision, night blindness and seizures. The more severe form involves coarse
facial features, bone malformations, abnormally enlarged liver and spleen,
mental handicaps, profound abdominal swelling, loss of muscle tissue and
difficulty breathing.

   Sialidosis is caused by a recessive gene that must be carried by both parents
for a child to inherit the disorder. Prevalence ranges from one in every 50,000
to 100,000 births with both sexes affected equally and found more frequently in
Italian and Japanese nationalities.

   There is no treatment or cure.

   Igdoura said hereditary disorders are more common than people think but
rarely get the attention or funding of heart disease and cancer.

   "What's interesting is that all of us have 40 to 50 mutations of various
genes. The unfortunate thing is when it happens, two people meet and they just
happen to have the same genes infected.

   "It's a disease which is quite peculiar because there are various types and
patients differ. We want to know why that is and provide a diagnostic tool to
parents to tell them what expectations they can have based on the genetic
problem," said Igdoura, an assistant professor of pathology and biology.

   Some of his research involves gene therapy, investigating ways in which an
adenovirus (cold virus) might be used to provide a corrective gene in patients.

   Ryan said yesterday's meeting has motivated her to begin fundraising and
public education.

   Both families believe more than the Internet was involved in yesterday's
meeting.

   "Tyler was born for a reason. He's an in vitro fertilization baby. Knowing
Dr. Igdoura started his research in 1998 -- almost at the same time that Tyler
was conceived -- I feel there's a great spiritual connection. I don't know if
Tyler is going to be saved but things are happening for a very great reason here
at McMaster," Ryan said.

   Skojec feels the same. "A sense of fate brought us together," he said, "and
our children were meant to do something. I don't want it to be otherwise."

   This story and related Web sites can be found at www.hamiltonspectator.com.

   You can reach Suzanne Morrison by e-mail at smorrison@hamiltonspectator.com
or by telephone at 905-526-3474.

GRAPHIC: Photo: Cathie Coward, the Hamilton Spectator; Dr. Suleiman Igdoura,
left, meets with Ida Ryan and Perry Huneault, parents of Tyler, and Bill Skojec,
father of Alex. The two boys have Sialidosis, a rare metabolic disorder. cutline

LOAD-DATE: November 5, 2001


                              348 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2001 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                       June 8, 2001 Friday Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; Pg. D17

LENGTH: 476 words

HEADLINE: New gene therapy may treat hemophilia

SOURCE: The Associated Press

BYLINE: Stephanie Nano

BODY:

   An experimental new gene-therapy technique has proved it can safely deliver a
healthy gene and shows promise as a treatment for hemophilia.

   Hemophilia patients do not have enough of a blood clotting protein because of
genetic defect. The goal of gene therapy is to get the body to produce the
protein by putting normal genes back into the patient.

   Until now, viruses have been used to ferry genes into the body, but this
carries some risk. The new method avoids these hazards by putting the gene into
cells taken from the patient.

   Researchers at Boston's Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center tested the
gene-transfer technology and reported their findings in yesterday's New England
Journal of Medicine. The technique was developed by the Cambridge, Mass.-based
Transkaryotic Therapies Inc., which funded the study.

   "I think it is extremely exciting for those who live with hemophilia," said
Mark Skinner, who has the disorder and is president of the National Hemophilia
Foundation. "As the field of gene therapy develops, it will offer a vastly
improved treatment and hopefully ultimately a cure for those with a bleeding
disorder."

   Researchers tested the method on six men with severe hemophilia A, the most
common type of the inherited disorder that afflicts about 15,000 men in the
United States. They removed a small piece of skin from the patient's arm and
used a brief electric pulse to put the blood clotting factor VIII gene into the
cells. The genetically modified cells were screened and later injected into
fatty tissue in the patient's belly.

   Dr. David A. Roth, who led the study, said the method proved to be safe and
there were no side effects. While designed to look at safety issues, the study
also showed promising signs that the treatment can work.

   Four of the six patients had modest increases of blood clotting protein. They
also had less bleeding or used less supplemental protein to control bleeding.
Two of the patients had no episodes of spontaneous bleeding in their joints for
10 months; such bleeding was a frequent occurrence for them before treatment.

   "In gene therapy, if you could just get their levels up a little, you can
make a major difference," Roth said. "You can really improve their quality of
life and how they do."

   The researchers said the non-viral technique has potential advantages over
gene therapy that uses viruses because it minimizes the risk of immune
reactions, infections and genetic mutations that may be associated with the use
of viruses. Doing the transfer outside the body also allows researchers to
screen the genetically modified cells before putting them into patients.

   "We may well ultimately find out that multiple gene therapies are needed
because different ones are right for different populations. There may not be one
single answer for everybody," Skinner said.

LOAD-DATE: November 5, 2001


                              349 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2001 Sun Media Corporation
                         Edmonton Sun (Alberta, Canada)

                      June 7, 2001 Thursday, Final Edition

SECTION: Sports; Pg. SP5

LENGTH: 461 words

HEADLINE: GENETICALLY MODIFIED;
FRANKENJOCK FEARS RIPPLE IN SCARY WARNING TO IOC MEDICAL COMMISSION

BYLINE: AP

DATELINE: LAUSANNE, Switzerland

BODY:

   The International Olympic Committee yesterday braced itself for the onset of
a problem more formidable and dangerous than doping: genetic modification of
athletes.

   Meeting with some of the world's leading genetic experts, representatives of
the IOC medical commission examined the potential impact of gene therapy in
sport and the ethical implications of genetically modifying athletes.

   Major advancements have been made recently in the field of gene therapy,
which involves injecting the body with new genes that produce therapeutic
proteins meant to block disease.

   The technique -- still in the experimental stage -- is designed to treat,
cure or prevent disease. But authorities fear some people will try to use gene
therapy to secure a competitive edge on the playing field.

   "There is an important mutation on the horizon," said Prince Alexandre de
Merode, chairman of the IOC's medical commission. "The application of gene
therapy is not feasible today and we know of no cases of abuse yet, but it could
become as important and widespread a problem as traditional doping in sport.

   "The same problem will likely occur in genetic therapy as we see elsewhere.
There is danger here if we are not prepared for it."

   Relating it only to sport, the experts defined gene therapy as the "transfer
of genetic material to humans for the treatment or prevention of diseases or
disorders." However, the definition applied only to non-permanent modification
of a person's body that will not transfer to offspring.

   The group did not delve into the possibility of altering embryos in the womb
to engineer designer athletes, a potential problem experts imagine happening
only in the distant future.

   "Currently there aren't even any gene-therapy medicines that are approved
worldwide for any human use, these gene-therapy medicines are now only being
developed," de Merode said.

   "So to come up with an individual completely different to others, who can run
much faster, be the man or woman of the century -- it won't come tomorrow, but
maybe 10-20 years' time," he said.

   Among the procedures under consideration to ferret out genetic cheats is the
detection of antigens -- or the presence of antibodies generated in the blood as
a result of gene therapy use. Other methods include scanning and analysing
footprints of genes, or protein in blood and saliva.

   Scientists agreed that gene-therapy medicines -- and their possible abuse by
athletes -- could be expected in three to five years.

   "With cops and thieves, the cops are always one step behind when there is a
robbery," IOC medical director Patrick Schamasch said. "But here I really think
we are not behind, we are a bit ahead, working with scientists to prevent what
may be a problem in the future."

LOAD-DATE: June 7, 2001


                              352 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2001 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                      June 7, 2001 Thursday Final Edition

SECTION: CANADA & WORLD; Pg. B06

LENGTH: 563 words

HEADLINE: Cells may regenerate after heart attack

SOURCE: New York Times News Service

BYLINE: Lawrence K. Altman

BODY:

   Medical dogma holds that damage to the heart is irreversible and that the
body cannot grow new cells to replace those that die from a heart attack or
other heart ailment.

   But new findings being published today provide what experts said is the
strongest evidence ever reported that some human heart muscle cells do
regenerate after a heart attack, although generally too few to repair all the
damage.

   Using a high-resolution microscope and a new laboratory technique, a team
headed by Dr. Piero Anversa of the New York Medical College in Valhalla has
found evidence that the human heart does grow new muscle cells after a heart
attack.

   The next main research step is to find ways to tap the heart's growth reserve
to better repair damage from a heart attack and many other heart conditions,
Anversa said in a telephone interview from Naples, Italy, where he lectured on
his findings yesterday.

   The area of heart cell regeneration research has been controversial. But
Anversa had support for his views from some leading experts not involved with
his research who called the report in today's New England Journal of Medicine "a
landmark study."

   The experts said that the findings have important implications for treating
heart disease.

   "This is a breakthrough, at least for a new way of thinking about the heart's
recuperative power and ways to repair a damaged heart," said Dr. Valentin
Fuster, a former president of the American Heart Association.

   With more research "you might have a new therapeutic weapon" for heart
disease and "the implications are incredible," Fuster, who is chief of
cardiology at Mt. Sinai Hospital in Manhattan, said in an interview.

   Dr. Claude J. Lenfant, the director of the National Heart Lung and Blood
Institute said that Anversa's findings "provide the most dramatic and clear-cut
demonstration to date of heart cell regeneration after cardiac injury."

   Anversa's findings add to those from studies on animals that show the dogma
that the heart cannot regenerate "is no longer true," said Lenfant whose federal
agency in Bethesda, Md., paid for the research that was conducted in Vallhala
and at the University of Udine and University of Trieste in Italy.

   Lenfant said the findings eventually could have "enormous public health
value" if it led to new therapies that delayed the onset of heart failure and
prolonged life. Lenfant also said that he believed Anversa's research holds
greater promise for heart disease than gene therapy, which many experts consider
a highly promising route to new therapies.

   But, Lenfant cautioned, the new therapies are "not going to be here
tomorrow."

   Anversa said he never believed that the heart was an exception to the rule
that cell regeneration is essential to life. Nor did he believe, as the dogma
held, that scarring after heart attacks was evidence against the heart's ability
to make new cells. Other organs, like the skin, constantly grow new cells to
replace old and damaged ones and still leave scars, Anversa said.

   Anversa said "it made no sense" to him that humans were born with a set
number of heart cells "that were able to contract 70 times a minute for more
than 100 years without the capacity for regeneration."

   Until recently, medical dogma also held that the brain could not grow new
cells. But a flurry of recent research activity has upset that belief.

LOAD-DATE: November 5, 2001


                              354 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2001 Sun Media Corporation
                                The Toronto Sun

                      June 7, 2001 Thursday, Final Edition

SECTION: Sports; Pg. 131; Sports Flashes

LENGTH: 383 words

HEADLINE: SPORTS FLASHES COLUMN

BYLINE: CP AND AP

BODY:

   IOC FEARS GENE THERAPY WILL REPLACE DOPING AS SCAM OF FUTURE

   The International Olympic Committee in Lausanne, Switzerland, yesterday
braced itself for the onset of a problem more formidable and dangerous than
doping: genetic modification of athletes.

   Meeting with some of the world's leading genetic experts, representatives of
the IOC medical commission examined the potential impact of gene therapy in
sport and the ethical implications of genetically modifying athletes.

   Major advancements have been made recently in the field of gene therapy,
which involves injecting the body with new genes that produce therapeutic
proteins meant to block disease.

   The technique -- still in the experimental stage -- is designed to treat,
cure or prevent disease. But authorities fear some people will try to use gene
therapy to secure a competitive edge on the playing field.

   "There is an important mutation on the horizon," said Prince Alexandre de
Merode, chairman of the IOC's medical commission. "It could become as important
and widespread a problem as traditional doping in sport.

   Scientists agreed that gene therapy medicines -- and their possible abuse by
athletes -- could be expected in three to five years.
   SQUASH: POWER DROPS MATCH
 Top-seed Jonathon Power of Toronto was upset in second round play by England's
Del Harris yesterday at the British Open squash tournament in Birmingham,
England.

   Harris, in the top-10 most of last year, varied his game throughout the
59-minute match to prevail 15-8, 8-15, 15-10, 15-7.

   Pan Am Games champion Graham Ryding of Toronto was also eliminated, losing to
seventh seed John White of Scotland 15-14, 15-8, 15-8.
   BRIEFLY:
 - Marion Jones, the first female athlete to win five track and field medals in
an Olympics, is becoming a TV reporter. But in basketball, not track. Her first
game is Sunday when the Houston Comets play the Phoenix Mercury.

   - Italy's Marco Pantani, a former Giro and Tour de France champion, pulled
out of the Giro d'Italia yesterday after losing another 12 minutes on the
leader. His team said he was ill and it was pointless to continue ... Pietro
Caucchioli won the 17th stage as Italian compatriot Gilbero Simoni retained the
overall lead. German star Jan Ullrich entered this leg in 74th place.

LOAD-DATE: June 7, 2001


                              357 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2001 Sun Media Corporation
                         Edmonton Sun (Alberta, Canada)

                       May 11, 2001 Friday, Final Edition

SECTION: News; Pg. 6; Hicks On Six

LENGTH: 1064 words

HEADLINE: HICKS ON SIX COLUMN

BYLINE: GRAHAM HICKS, EDMONTON SUN

BODY:

   PATIENCE IS A VIRTUE
 A man observed a woman in the grocery store with a three-year-old girl in her
shopping cart. As they passed the cookie section, the child asked for cookies
and her mother told her "no." The little girl began to whine and fuss.

   The mother said quietly, "Ellen, we just have half the aisles left to go
through. Don't be upset. It won't be long."

   He passed the mother again in the candy aisle. Of course, the little girl
began to shout for candy. When she was told she couldn't have any, she began to
cry.

   The mother said, "Ellen, don't cry. Only two more aisles, then we'll be
checking out."

   The man happened to be behind the pair at the check-out, where the little
girl clamoured for gum and burst into a tantrum upon discovering she'd get none.

   The mother quietly said, "Ellen, we'll be out of the store in five minutes.
Then you can go home and have a nice nap."

   In the parking lot, the man stopped the woman to compliment her. "I couldn't
help noticing how patient you were with little Ellen ..."

   The mother interrupted, "My little girl's name is Tammy. I'm Ellen."
   - - -
   THE BEST IS YET TO COME
 The above joke is one of the three winners from our Hicks on Six Mother's Day
Contest. We'll run the other two jokes and the winners' names (and their moms)
in our Mother's Day edition. They've all been contacted and each will enjoy one
of our three prizes: a Mother's Day brunch from Doucette's Dining, a Mother's
Day buffet from Doucette's, and a "Spa Essentials" beauty package from Avanti's
Hair/Sanctuary Spa.

   If you're getting slightly frantic about finding a spot to treat mom on
Sunday, try the Parkallen Restaurant on 109 Street.

   The Rustom family made a last-minute decision to open this Sunday from 4 to 9
p.m. For this plug, we have a promise from Joseph Rustom for a future Parkallen
banquet as a Hicks on Six contest prize.
   - - -
   GAFFES ALWAYS TRUMP GOOD NEWS
   Bill, Bill, Bill.
 You were doing so well in your State of the City annual address to the Chamber
of Commerce luncheon yesterday.

   But the mayor made a joke, a gratuitous side comment, about the now-deceased
president Primo Nebiolo of the International Amateur Athletics Federation,
saying the guy looked like and sometimes acted like Italian dictator Benito
Mussolini.

   It was a gaffe, an innocent gaffe that comes from not engaging the brain
before starting the mouth.

   As our mayor is prone to do from time to time.

   The media jumped all over it and of course the gaffe is today's news, with
the rest of the speech likely getting short shrift.

   Too bad. It was good, a good campaign speech, arguably Smith's best "state of
the city" address since being elected six years ago.

   Smith spoke on what he called the four fundamental pillars of the city -
building our regional economy, visions and the plans to realize those visions,
encouraging community leadership, continuing to build that oh-so-important
intangible called civic pride.

   And he only said "the best city in the best province in the best country in
the world" once!

   I liked his ending, referring back to King Ralph's comment that Edmonton was
"about to crank big-time."

   "Ralph," Booster Bill said, "you ain't seen nothing yet!"
    - - -
   PROJECTS KEEP COMING
 Smith never was one to keep a secret, and he couldn't help hinting at items not
yet in the announceable stage.

   - Like the fact a letter of agreement has been signed, speeding along plans
for a world-class new provincial museum "which must be downtown."

   - Like the new owners of the downtown Telus towers planning to revive the
long-dead Edmonton Club space on the southeast corner of that property.

   - Like a historic walkway treatment planned for 108 Street leading to the
provincial Legislature.

   - Like a Hall D for the Shaw Convention Centre, basically an extension of the
convention centre's great hall eastward.
   Hey Bill, thanks for the tips!
   - - -
   NON-STOP TO THE GOLDEN GATE
 The mayor mentioned the new Air Canada daily non-stop from the end of June to
September, Edmonton to San Francisco.

   Boy, was that one under-reported! And why San Francisco, for the summer? It
surprised the airport authority too. San Francisco was on the list of desired
non-stop destinations, but not at the top.

   There's method in Air Canada's madness.

   San Francisco is a major hub of Air Canada partner United Airlines, with
great connecting flights to Asia, South America, Mexico and other parts of the
Excited States. It's actually a better international hub than Los Angeles.

   Flying habits make San Francisco work as a one-flight-a-day destination out
of Edmonton. Apparently high-tech folks (those who'll pay top dollar for
business class) fly in and out of San Francisco frequently. But once the
business is done, Northern California is a favourite spot to stay for a few days
of holiday.

   So the high-tech business person isn't in such a hurry to get back, so the
one flight a day should work. Get that?

   And if the flights are commercially viable, there's a good chance Air Canada
will keep them once the test period is done.
   - - -
   THIS 'N' THAT
 - The local CNIB (Canadian National Institute for the Blind) used its annual
Visions Luncheon Wednesday for its state-of-the-union report. Renovations of the
Jasper Avenue complex are complete, with a splendid new high-tech training
centre and an expanded children's centre and program.

   - Another boost for teenaged Edmonton country singer Samantha King: She'll be
one of the Worlds' closing ceremonies acts.

   - Something was missing during the Canadian Cancer Society April drive - like
June and Bob Kerrison's annual House of Fashion fashion show at the Westin. The
fashion show was the traditional kickoff to cancer awareness month, with every
media personality in town participating. But the House of Fashion is gone, and
June and Bob are taking a break. Temporary, we hope.

   - James Cumming, former chamber president and president of gas-bar builders
Cormode and Dickson Construction, is the incoming president of the Muscular
Dystrophy Association of Canada. James and Debbie's son Garrett, 15, has the
disease that causes gradual muscular weakening. It is usually genetic in origin.
Being fine community-first folks, the Cummings have long supported gene-therapy
research in search of an MD cure.

GRAPHIC: photo of BILL SMITH; Good news gaffe

LOAD-DATE: May 11, 2001


                              358 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2001 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                      May 10, 2001 Thursday Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; Pg. D06

LENGTH: 379 words

HEADLINE: Blind dogs see with gene therapy

SOURCE: Newsday

BYLINE: Jamie Talan

BODY:

   Researchers have given four blind dogs at least partial vision by injecting
genes into the dogs' retinas. This is the first time that scientists have made
blind animals see, and the success paves the way for a treatment for humans with
some forms of congenital blindness.

   "It's very exciting," said Dr. Jean Bennett, associate professor of
ophthalmology at the University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine and lead
author of a study reported in the current issue of Nature Genetics. "We are very
happy with the results and hope that this technique will work in children." The
finding appears to hold promise for newborns with an inherited genetic disease
called leber congenital amaurosis, or LCA. With LCA, the retina is not able to
process information.

   Each year, LCA affects about 10,000 children in the United States. They are
born blind or with very little sight.

   The dogs in the Nature Genetics study were Briards, a breed known to have a
genetic mutation responsible for about 10 per cent of LCA cases. Each of the
four had LCA, and was treated in only the right eye.

   Bennett collaborated with Cornell University researchers who originally
cloned the gene, and scientists at the University of Florida made the virus that
would carry it into the retina, where it would take on its new job producing the
healthy version of a protein involved in delivering the visual message from the
retina to the brain for processing.

   The dogs' retinal activity was measured electronically four months after the
gene therapy. A light was shone into the treated eyes, and the results indicated
normal retinal activity.

   "We found ... evidence that the signal was transferred to the brain," Bennett
said. "The brain could understand what the eye was seeing." Researchers also put
the dogs into a room with furniture. The treated animals managed to avoid the
objects to their right, even as the untreated dogs bumped into the obstacles.

   Researchers will now study whether there are any side effects of the gene
therapy technique. If not, human trials could be a few years away. "This is an
obvious treatment and we hope this remarkable progress will be translated to
humans," Bennett said, adding the animals are still showing evidence of sight,
nine months later.

LOAD-DATE: November 5, 2001


                              359 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2001 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                      April 30, 2001 Monday Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; Pg. D11

LENGTH: 317 words

HEADLINE: Scientists restore vision in dogs

SOURCE: The Associated Press

BYLINE: Malcolm Ritter

DATELINE: NEW YORK

BODY:

   Scientists have restored vision in dogs with a version of a rare disease that
blinds human infants by using gene therapy. The work may lead to treatments for
genetic forms of blindness.

   The dogs had a version of Leber congenital amaurosis, an untreatable
condition that causes near total blindness in infancy. Perhaps 10,000 Americans
have it, and about 1,000 of them have the particular genetic defect corrected in
the dogs, said researcher Dr. Jean Bennett.

   If the gene therapy works in Leber patients, it might pave the way for
treating a variety of hereditary vision diseases that strike the retina, known
collectively as retinitis pigmentosa, which affects 100,000 to 200,000
Americans, said Dr. Gerald Chader, chief scientific officer of the Foundation
Fighting Blindness.

   "It should open the floodgates," said Chader, whose organization helped
finance the research.

   Bennett, associate professor of ophthalmology the University of Pennsylvania,
and colleagues report their experiments on three Briard dogs in the May issue of
journal Nature Genetics.

   She said she hopes initial experiments in people can begin within about two
years.

   The dogs were blind because they lacked a particular gene. Without it, their
eyes could not make a pigment necessary to perceive light. The therapy was
designed to deliver working copies of the gene to their eyes.

   Researchers used eye surgery to deliver a dose of the gene, carried by a
virus that deposited the gene within eye cells. They treated one eye in each
animal and used the other eye for comparison.

   Four months after treatment, several tests showed the animals had regained at
least some sight in the treated eye. Most dramatically, the dogs were allowed to
wander in a room cluttered with furniture. The dogs were much better at avoiding
objects on the same side of their bodies as the treated eye than on the other
side.

LOAD-DATE: November 5, 2001


                              362 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2001 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                      April 16, 2001 Monday Final Edition

SECTION: CANADA & WORLD; Pg. C01

LENGTH: 305 words

HEADLINE: DNA pioneer wants laws permitting gene therapy

SOURCE: The Independent, London

BYLINE: Steve Connor

BODY:

   Dr. James Watson, the "father" of DNA science, has called for the law to be
changed so that scientists can alter the genes of sperm, eggs and embryos and so
rid genetic defects from future generations.

   Watson, who with Francis Crick shared a Nobel prize for the discovery of the
DNA double helix in 1953, says fears over the creation of "designer babies" are
misplaced and that the potential benefits of controlling the ultimate engine of
human evolution far outweigh the risks.

   Altering the genes of sperm, eggs and embryos -- so-called germ-line gene
therapy -- is outlawed in Britain, America and many other countries, ostensibly
because of the risks of meddling with genetic material and introducing possible
side effects that will be passed on to subsequent generations.

   There are also ethical and moral concerns about tinkering with human DNA to
improve a family's genetic stock either by eliminating "bad" genes or
introducing "good" ones. Critics say it raises the spectre of eugenics, as
practised by the Nazis.

   Watson, who played a formative role in the human genome project, argues
passionately for society to review its opposition to germ-line gene therapy.

   "I strongly favour controlling our children's genetic destinies. Working
intelligently and wisely to see that good genes dominate as many lives as
possible is the truly moral way for us to proceed," Watson writes.

   Answering those who even oppose the genetic modification of plants and
animals, he says: "To my knowledge, not one illness, much less fatality, has
been caused by a genetically manipulated organism."

   Attempts to prevent germ-line gene therapy on humans are reminiscent of the
measures designed to limit the use of DNA manipulation 25 years ago when
scientists agreed to a temporary moratorium on the technology, Watson says.

LOAD-DATE: November 5, 2001


                              364 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2001 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                     April 11, 2001 Wednesday Final Edition

SECTION: CANADA & WORLD; Pg. D03

LENGTH: 708 words

HEADLINE: Briefly

SOURCE: The Hamilton Spectator

BODY:

   ONTARIO

   Methadone missing again

   TORONTO -- For the second time in three weeks and the third time this year
police are warning residents of Canada's most populous city about another case
of misplaced methadone.

   "This has happened four or five times in different divisions over the past
six months, but there doesn't seem to be a pattern to it," said Toronto police
spokesman Sgt. Jim Muscat.

   Methadone, a powerful narcotic analgesic painkiller, is the world's most
popular and successful treatment for drug users trying to recover from
debilitating drug addictions.

   Environment short on cash

   KITCHENER -- Elizabeth Witmer said yesterday the Ontario government will have
to increase spending and hire more people if the Environment Ministry is going
to meet the challenges it faces.

   "Moving from the Ministry of Health with a budget of $22.5 billion to
environment with $160 million has been interesting," Witmer told the
Kitchener-Waterloo Record's Community Editorial Board.

   Witmer served as health minister before taking on the environment portfolio
in February.

   CANADA

   Ottawa lauds summit's role

   OTTAWA -- The federal government cited the usefulness of Summits of the
Americas on yesterday after releasing a report highlighting what steps it has
taken after previous conferences. Marc Lortie, the Canadian representative or
"sherpa" for the summit this month in Quebec City, said that action plans do
result in change at a national level.

   Snowbird jet skids on runway

   COMOX, B.C. -- One of Canada's famous Snowbird jets skidded to a halt
yesterday when its landing gear collapsed during a landing by the military
aerobatic team on Vancouver Island.

   The pilot was unhurt as the jet skidded to a stop on the runway at CFB Comox.
Captain Jeff Manney said the accident occurred as the nine-plane flying team was
landing in formation.

   The entire flying team has been grounded pending an investigation, he said.

   WORLD

   Victims may see execution

   OKLAHOMA CITY, Okla. -- U.S. Attorney General John Ashcroft signaled
yesterday that he favours allowing survivors of the Oklahoma City bombing and
victims' relatives to witness Timothy McVeigh's execution by closed-circuit
television.

   He promised to announce a decision this week after he returns to Washington
and confers with federal Bureau of Prisons officials.

   Surgery fights Alzheimer's

   WASHINGTON -- Doctors in California have implanted genetically modified cells
into the brain of a 60-year-old woman with early Alzheimer's disease in an
effort to slow her mental decline, members of the research team announced
yesterday.

   The experimental surgery, which researchers hope to test in seven additional
patients, represents the first trial of gene therapy for a degenerative brain
disorder, said neuroscientist Mark Tuszynski, who heads the project.

   Bush's missing cat reappears

   WASHINGTON -- President George W. Bush's former cat, missing for weeks,
turned up in the wee hours yesterday morning strolling Los Angeles' Avenue of
the Stars.

   Recognized by a night watchman along the corridor of production studios where
many a TV star has been born, Ernie was reportedly in ragged shape and without
his custom-fitted toe caps. By yesterday afternoon, the orange and white tabby
cat was back with Bush fundraiser Brad Freeman and "doing interviews," first
lady Laura Bush's office announced at the White House.

   After the Bushes decided in January that Ernie's claws would be a disaster
for White House furnishings, Freeman, an investment banker and family friend,
took the cat in and capped his menacing little toes. Ernie disappeared from
Freeman's home in Brentwood, Calif., about three weeks ago.

   Blood replacement approved

   JOHANNESBURG -- South Africa has become the first country in the world to
approve a solution that can be used in place of blood in transfusions in humans,
a health care company announced yesterday.

   The solution, Hemopure, acts like red blood cells, carrying oxygen to the
body's tissues. South Africa's Medicines Control Council approved it Monday
afternoon to treat acute anemia in surgery patients, said Carl Rausch, CEO of
Biopure, which developed the product.

   -- Hamilton Spectator wire services

LOAD-DATE: November 5, 2001


                              366 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2001 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                      March 30, 2001 Friday Final Edition

SECTION: CANADA & WORLD; Pg. C01

LENGTH: 802 words

HEADLINE: No research funding for human cloning

SOURCE: The Hamilton Spectator

BYLINE: Suzanne Morrison

BODY:

   Medical Research Reporter

   The major funding body for medical research in Canada is putting a ban on
human cloning while supporting the use of human embryos in stem cell research.

   A discussion paper released by the Canadian Institutes of Health Research
(CIHR) yesterday made it clear funding should be available for scientists
exploring the enormous medical promises that stem cell research holds.

   But it recommends a continued moratorium on cloning or creating human embryos
for stem cell research.

   Dr. Jack Gauldie, head of a leading-edge centre on gene therapeutics at
McMaster University, said recommendations in the draft report -- Human Stem Cell
Research Opportunities for Health and Ethical Perspectives -- are very reasoned
statements.

   "They are placing regulations on the books that allow us to move forward and
not simply block all research.

   "But, there are limits in the kind of research that's going to be funded."

   McMaster University geneticist Dr. Patricia Chang works only with non-human
(animal) stem cells in her laboratory.

   "We do anticipate getting into the human cell area as our gene therapy work
is progressing towards human application."

   In releasing the discussion paper yesterday, CIHR president Dr. Alan
Bernstein said stem cell research holds great potential for the treatment of a
number of serious conditions, including Alzheimer's and Parkinson's diseases,
diabetes and spinal cord injuries.

   "Guidelines reassure the public and scientists that embryonic stem cell
research will be undertaken in a well-defined ethical and legal in Canada."

   Canada currently has no regulations, although there are general ethical
guidelines on the use of embryonic and fetal tissue in research.

   The discussion paper was developed by an ad hoc working group chaired by Dr.
Janet Rossant, a Toronto geneticist and microbiologist.

   Stem cells are immature cells that have the ability to either develop into a
variety of human tissues or organs and to renew themselves. Embryonic stem cells
are the most flexible -- and most controversial -- because they can develop into
any type of cell in the body.

   Campaign Life Coalition, which believes human life begins at conception, is
totally opposed to CIHR's guidelines and plans to lobby heavily against them
when discussions get under way across Canada.

   "We don't want unborn children being used for experimentation of any kind,"
said Mary Ellen Douglas, national organizer.

   Douglas believes CIHR's moratorium on human cloning is simply a way of buying
time to build up public support for the technique.

   Chang agrees the moratorium on cloning is needed because of the risks and
ethical issues involved. "There is no call for it at this point."

   Cloning has been performed on hundreds of mice, cows, goats and pigs since
Dolly the cloned lamb's pioneering birth in 1997.

   But, subsequent research has shown nearly all of these animals suffer from a
wide range of unpredictable defects, from gross deformities to heightened
susceptibility to disease.

   At McMaster University, Gauldie said researchers are taking stem cells from
adult human bone marrow and maturing them in the laboratory to stimulate the
immune systems of cancer patients.

   Will he ever use human embryonic stem cells?

   "I would say that we would have a look at it," he said. "But, it would only
be if it was better than we are currently doing -- by a long way."

   CIHR hands out about $400 million in federal operating grants each year.

   It plans to weigh public opinion on its discussion paper before establishing
firm guidelines, probably by the fall.

   Rossant said the discussion paper has arisen because scientists know stem
cells and related research have enormous potential.

   "The question is whether the benefits outweigh the controversial aspects of
using early embryos of this sort," she said.

   You can reach Suzanne Morrison by e-mail at smorrison@hamiltonspectator.com
or by calling 905-526-3474

   Report: Canadian Institutes of Health Research draft report suggests Canada
allow use of human embryos for stem cell research but ban human cloning.

   Stem cells: Immature cells that have the ability to develop into human
tissues or organs. Embryonic stem cells are the most flexible because they can
develop into any type of cell.

   Possible benefits: Provide hope for organ replacement and cures for
degenerative diseases like Parkinson's, Alzheimer's and multiple sclerosis.

   Embryonic cells: Report recommends they be primarily obtained from embryos
created by in-vitro fertilization for fertility treatments but no longer needed.

   Controversy: Right-to-life activists oppose the use of embryos for research.

   Law: Currently no law governing stem cell research or cloning, though draft
legislation expected this spring.

LOAD-DATE: November 5, 2001


                              367 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2001 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                      March 20, 2001 Tuesday Final Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D06

LENGTH: 581 words

HEADLINE: City woos biotech firms

SOURCE: The Hamilton Spectator

BYLINE: Brent Lawson

BODY:

   Hamilton hopes to tap into the exploding growth in the field of
biotechnology, springing in part from the decoding of our genetic code.

   And the city will go under the microscope in a study rating the potential to
become a favoured location for firms working in biotechnology.

   Neil Everson, executive director of economic development, said the city
currently has about eight firms in the field, and believes it is in a good
position to attract more.

   Everson said many dot-com and knowledge-based companies have peaked and are
going downhill, but the biotech industry is expected to grow exponentially in
the next 10 to 15 years.

   The study is being done in conjunction with McMaster University and its
specialists in health and science-related bio-tech research.

   But so far there has been little to trumpet any specific signs of growth in
the fledgling sector because some projects are in the early stages of
development, still working to firm up business plans and attract funding.

   And some firms in the field are concerned about the sensitive nature of their
work and prefer to be out of the spotlight. Developments in gene therapy have
prompted wide-ranging debate on the potential use of the technology.

   Biotech was identified as a potential target as part of long-range economic
planning for the city. One suggestion would see a cluster of biotech and medical
firms along the Highway 6 corridor through Flamborough.

   The development of Hamilton as a home for the bio-tech industry would be of
massive significance, providing employment, increasing the tax base and
generally giving an economic shot in the arm to the city.

   The location of more biotech firms in Hamilton would also open the door to
more partnerships for McMaster, which in turn could attract further government
and private sector funding for research.

   Marcel Mongeon, executive director of the office of research contracts and
intellectual property at McMaster, said bio-tech is rapidly developing as a key
component of economic growth in many areas of the country.

   "It would be sad to think that with one of Canada's finest medical schools
right here in Hamilton, and with a large infrastructure in health care we
weren't able to take advantage of the economic potential."

   The study is needed to provide a clearer picture of biotech in Hamilton. "I
hear various estimates of the number of companies out there, yet when I start
scratching the surface at times I surprisingly find more companies that I didn't
even know about."

   Mongeon said he is aware of at least three projects involving biotech that
could develop into new businesses in the community. "Part of the challenge, like
with the human genome, that we have in a community like Hamilton is to find out
what activity is currently going on in this area and how in fact are we able to
take advantage of that."

   And what do biotech firms do these days? "They can run the whole gamut from
anything from simple analysis of drugs and compounds, through to the more
complex drug discovery phases."

   A project supported by the province and the Canada Centre for Innovation is
under way in Hamilton to help identify potential targets for new drugs. The
rapidly-growing area of functional genomics and gene-based therapies is also
starting to be utilized here.

   "It used to be pharmaceuticals was pretty much what you did, you sort of
created a new pill, and dispensed pills. Now, we are getting into much more
esoteric areas."

GRAPHIC: Photo: The Hamilton Spectator File Photo; The suitability of Hamilton
to be a centre for the biotech industry is the focus of a new study.

LOAD-DATE: November 5, 2001


                              368 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2001 Sun Media Corporation
                                The Toronto Sun

                      March 18, 2001 Sunday, Final Edition

SECTION: Lifestyle; Pg. 48; Health Notes

LENGTH: 816 words

HEADLINE: HEALTH NOTES COLUMN

BYLINE: MARILYN LINTON

BODY:

   DNA 101 ...
 With the mapping of the entire human genome now complete, get ready for regular
stories on the vast and challenging world of genomics, which includes everything
from the relationship between gene function and disease to gene therapy.

   To help readers become more familiar with the language of genes and the
complexity of gene therapy, a recent issue of the Mayo Clinic Women's
HealthSource newsletter provided the following basics:

   - Except for blood cells, each of the 100 trillion cells in the human body
contains the entire human genome (all the genetic information needed to build a
human being). This info is encoded in six billion base pairs, sub-units of DNA.
Egg and sperm cells each have half this amount of DNA.

   - DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) is the principal carrier of a cell's genetic
info. It's organized into two chains that form a double helix.

   - RNA (ribonucleic acid) is a single-stranded chain made by DNA that helps
guide protein synthesis.

   - Protein is composed of amino acids and serve as the body's workhorses.

   - Genes are the biological units of heredity. Made up of segments of DNA,
each gene acts as a blueprint for asking a specific enzyme or other protein.

   - Chromosomes are rod-like structures containing DNA and protein located in
the cell nucleus. There are 46 chromosomes in each human cell.
   RESISTANCE MOVEMENT ...
 According to Health After 50, The Johns Hopkins Medical Letter, lifting weights
(called resistance training) can improve muscle strength, regardless of age. In
a small study of men, aged 60 and older, those who participated in a resistance
training program were able to increase the intensity of the exercises they
performed by up to 80% after 16 weeks. In addition, the amount of body fat they
shed was comparable to the amount shed by younger people performing similar
activities.
   MEDITERRANEAN CRUISE ...
 Not the boat kind, the food kind. According to the The International Olive Oil
Council, adopting a Mediterranean diet is not only healthy, but incredibly rich
in taste and flavour. It's also phenomenally diverse, considering the fact that
eating the Mediterranean way can include recipes from more then a dozen
countries, including Turkey, Spain, France, Italy and Israel.

   Studies have shown that the Mediterranean diet may be heart-protective in
that elements of it, olive oil included, are full of antioxidants. The actual
diet is a guideline that is based on a pyramid that reflects the dietary
traditions of Crete and southern Italy. As illustrated here, the pyramid is
structured this way. Included daily are grains, which form the base and the
majority of meals in Mediterranean countries (think breads, pasta, couscous and
rice). The next layer includes fruits and veggies (in most Mediterranean
countries, fruits make up dessert), plus legumes and nuts (think chickpeas,
lentils, walnuts -- all fibre-rich). Fats from olive oil, used in salad
dressings, or in sauteeing are also used daily.

   Cheese, yogurt and dairy products are the next layer, then fish, poultry,
eggs and sweets -- each recommended as part of the diet a few times per week. At
the top of the pyramid is red meat, recommended only a few times per month. For
anyone who loves their pasta (and can eat it without gaining weight) this may
very well be the best diet in the world.

   HOW DOES A BLIND PERSON CROSS THE STREET? ...

   Kudos to the Canadian Institute for the Blind (CNIB) for helping sighted
people to better understand the challenging world of blind and visually impaired
people. In raising awareness about the issues and challenges facing the 100,000
Canadians annually who are blind or visually impaired, the CNIB has published
When You Meet A Blind Person, a simple guide that explains what to do (or not to
do) when you meet a blind person.

   For instance, when you first make contact with a blind person, first inquire
if your assistance is desired. If so, touch your hand to the back of his hand as
a signal for him to take your arm.

   When coming to a doorway, tell the blind person when he is approaching a door
and in which direction the door opens. As for stairs, alert the blind person
verbally when he is to walk up or down stairs. Come to a full stop before the
stairs. Stop at the end of the stairs and also verbalize the last step to the
blind person.

   And how do you help a blind person to cross the street? Simply offer your
assistance and he will tell you the best way to guide him. Let him know when you
are coming to a curb and whether you will be stepping up or down. Whatever you
do, always remember the following: "When you meet a person who is blind or
visually impaired, the key word is person, not blind," says Dr. Euclid Herie,
president and CEO of the CNIB. "They're individuals who do the same things as
people who are sighted, they just use different techniques sometimes."

GRAPHIC: drawing ; MEDITERRANEAN DIET PLAN; SOURCE: 1993 International
Conference on Diets of the Mediterranean

LOAD-DATE: March 21, 2001


                              369 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2001 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                      March 16, 2001 Friday Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 2432 words

HEADLINE: Burlington prospers by landing high-tech firms

SOURCE: The Hamilton Spectator

BYLINE: Brent Lawson

BODY:

   Welcome to Burlington, the city that has never met a quiet, non-polluting
company it didn't like.

   The prosperous community is developing a growing reputation as a haven for
high-tech firms and a heaven for skilled workers, all bolstered by recent news
of a joint campaign by several companies to fill more than 800 positions.

   And the continued success of such firms as Legato Systems Inc. stands in
sharp contrast to the crash-and-burn phenomenon that has rocked many high-tech
firms.

   Next week, the U.S. software innovator is poised to open new, larger
operations in Burlington.

   Legato spokesperson Steve Parsons said the facility is a development centre
for new products and a showcase for the firm's software, sold around the world.

   "Burlington has proven to be a good place for Legato to do business."

   Officials now estimate there are about 100 high-tech firms in Burlington,
employing approximately 4,500 people. Such jobs are a contributing factor in
Burlington's per capita income of more than $33,220, compared to about $22,800
in Hamilton. In 1996, Revenue Canada ranked Burlington's average income in
Canada's top 10.

   Companies range from small operations employing a handful of people to larger
firms such as high-tech camera makers Wescam Inc., (300 employees) and Gennum
Corp. (350 employees).

   Gennum designs and makes silicon chips for digital hearing aids and
high-definition television.

   INVISIBLE GROWTH -- The high-technology sector seems to be reeling. Yet
Burlington firms are campaigning for 800 new workers. Quietly, Burlington has
become home to more than 100 high-tech companies employing 4,500 people. Credit
good lifestyle and good location, including ties to Mohawk College and McMaster
University.

   Firms thriving in Burlington provide research on new drugs, develop and
deploy robotics, fashion military sonar equipment for NATO countries, deliver
microchip circuitry and build aerospace components.

   They also encourage computers to talk to each other across the room or around
the world, and develop software to tell machines -- and probably people -- what
to do.

   Other firms have sprung up to provide less glamorous but vitally important
high-tech support for the sector, which sees many firms competing in the global
marketplace.

   This collection makes Burlington the envy of other communities that also hope
to lure clean, high-tech industries and well-paying jobs and to secure a healthy
piece of the growing new economy stemming from technology and information.

   In Burlington, the development of a high-tech profile has been gradual and
,like a Stealth aircraft, not visible on the radar screens of many local
residents. That's one reason job recruitment campaigns focus in part on
Burlington commuters: Organizers hope to reach residents who now leave town to
work, to convince them to look in their own back yard for jobs in the high-tech
field.

   The current bonanza of well-paid jobs gives the appearance that Burlington
can even thumb its nose at the widespread downturn affecting the wide world of
technology, as if granted immunity. In the rest of North America, the demise of
several dot.com firms, falling profits and dramatically reduced expectations for
high-tech operations have shaken consumer and investor confidence.

   Local experts believe the city's wide range of small- and medium-sized
technology firms offers a diversity to help withstand the cyclical nature of
many sectors of business.

   It's just another challenge to overcome in this city by the Bay, where
success is a state of mind for the Burlington Economic Development Corporation.
The non-profit corporation, run by a volunteer board of directors, markets the
city to new and existing businesses and is co-ordinating the current recruitment
campaign. It operates at arm's length from city hall and is free to develop
partnerships with local businesses.

   This is a city where people are hard-pressed to even know how to track
business failure, where an area zoned for industry is called "employment" land,
where people are reluctant to use the dreaded "r" word, as though to utter
recession would somehow allow it to sneak into the realm of possibility.

   Of course, professional boosters in any town are unable see, speak or hear of
bad times. They are forever cheery forecasters who always see a sunny day on the
horizon.

   But any notion of knee-jerk, hollow cheerleading is long gone in Burlington.
Instead, skilled professionals employ detailed research to attract and nurture
business. And like a covert military operation, the vocabulary includes "target
sectors" and "gathering intelligence" to describe the precise steps to be
followed before striking.

   It's also a city blessed by good planning and good fortune. No one is relying
on divine intervention to lend a hand, although in Burlington it's a good bet
there is a business plan ready to cover that eventuality as well.

   The ammunition to entice business to Burlington is textbook: A well-educated
community, access to a wide pool of skilled workers, and proximity to major
highways, Hamilton and Toronto airports, the U.S. and McMaster University and
Mohawk College. And all a part of what the city believes to be an enviable
lifestyle in a progressive community: "Come for business, stay for life," offers
one slogan.

   Even the congested Queen Elizabeth Way apparently has a sunny side. The
traffic jams offer daily evidence of the cost of commuting, estimated at 500
hours a year for someone travelling to and from Toronto. One city campaign
suggests you can ride your bike to work in Burlington: "Fast track your career
... download your stress."

   Many high-tech companies have located on the service roads north and south of
the highway, which gives them visibility. The busy highway is also viewed by
some firms as a barometer of the economy, the roaring trucks a visual reminder
that business keeps pulsing along in the area.

   The recruitment drive also dovetails with an overall goal of "live where you
work" now being pursued by many communities. In Burlington, about 60 per cent of
the workforce is employed outside the city. This adds pressure to already
crowded roads.

   For businesses, employees who can avoid the commute and settle in Burlington
may be more likely to stay put, saving firms the expensive job of replacing
them, and finding and training new employees. And the city's strategies have
coincided with a changing business world, now heavy in an information-based
economy and high-tech businesses.

   But the key factor for many companies remains the location.

   Lauren Cuddy is president of Innovus Research Inc., a spinoff from McMaster
University in 1984 which was originally set up in Hamilton.

   "We moved to Burlington because it was a better location to recruit
employees." The city also has better access to pharmaceutical companies in
Mississauga and the Toronto airport.

   The firm has been growing at more than 30 per cent a year since leaving
Hamilton. It employs about 80 people today and provides clinical trials for
pharmaceutical companies to test new drugs not yet on the market.

   Most of their employees have advanced degrees, and Burlington's location
helps to attract those people.

   "Certainly, when we were in Hamilton, we had a hard time recruiting people.
Hamilton is just psychologically that much farther away from Toronto."

   Most of employees live in Mississauga and Toronto, but more are starting to
move to Burlington. The city is also attractive because of its lifestyle and
because the city has a growing reputation as a high-tech area.

   Cuddy said the traffic is one downside. "I think the congestion is going to
play a part in terms of allowing employees more flexibility to work from home or
to work at the office."

   Hardsoft Systems Ltd. came to life 14 years ago as a one-person,
entrepreneurial business and now employs 15 people. General manager Tim Hanlon
said the firm provides such services as computer networking, high-tech machine
assistance, a Web hosting service and computer training. "With the ability of
everything to be virtual, we can service clients in the Bahamas."

   Hanlon said business opportunities throughout the Golden Horseshoe and into
Kitchener-Waterloo stem from Burlington's location, which he sees as "a good
place to live, a good place to work, a good place to have an office."

   Business is good today and Hanlon is upbeat about future prospects: "We look
out and see lots of trucks on the road and figure the economy must be pretty
good."

   Canopy, which does systems integration -- it makes software applications talk
to each other -- is the Canadian branch for the U.S. parent firm. It provides
consulting and technical programming services. Kent Harrison, director of
Canadian operations, said Burlington was selected for the pool of skilled
technical workers in the area.

   The company, which employs 35, also benefits from the exchange rate.

   "Quite frankly, working for an American company, the salaries are
considerably lower here when you consider the exchange rate."

   Northrop Grumman, which employs close to 200 people, started life in
Burlington as the information services division of Westinghouse Canada.
Vice-president Larry Kretz said the operation was then purchased by the
U.S.-based Northrop Grumman.

   They build software and network solutions for the air travel and machine tool
controls. The defence electronic department is basically a sonar group for the
NATO navies. The firm is currently expanding in the area of new technologies.

   "Like everybody, we're trying to find the right kind of engineering support,
people with specific skills." And what attracts employees to Burlington? "I
think it's the lifestyle -- not having to drive to Toronto. That's huge. It's an
active part of our recruitment."

   Ron Durkin of ABB Automation, which specializes in industrial automation,
agrees. Durkin is also president of the Business Information Technology Network,
which began as a small networking group in the early '90s. The group shares
information and expertise and will sponsor a job fair this fall.

   "I think it's a good place to live, work and play... instead of commuting to
Toronto. With high-tech, it's not necessary to be at the centre of a big city
like Toronto. You can be anywhere."

   Durkin also noted the "clustering" effect: Companies like to locate where
other high-tech firms already exist. "That is happening in Burlington and
surrounding areas. As it grows, the critical mass builds up and more and more
people want to be a part of it."

   But the proximity to McMaster University and Mohawk College is another
strength because education is a constant in the world of technology.

   "It's an ongoing process because the technology is changing so much."

   For example, ABB has an active program with Mohawk College. Companies can
consider the type of skills required in the future and help set curriculum so
future Mohawk graduates will meet the needs of the area companies. "It's a
partnership of education and industry to figure out what the needs are going to
be and how to plan for that."

   Gayla McDonald, general manager of the Burlington Economic Development
Corporation, says Burlington continues to draw interest from outside firms. "In
the face of what we are hearing is a terrible downturn in the U.S. economy, I
think our dollar still makes us a very attractive option for U.S. investment."

   The educated labour force is also high on the agenda of firms south of the
border. "We are seeing site visits now almost weekly or even bi-weekly."

   McDonald says she is not aware of any specific problems in the high-tech
firms in Burlington. "I am hearing no gloom and doom at the moment in
Burlington. I really feel the media sometimes exacerbates the problem."

   She said the U.S. economic downturn may eventually impact Canadian firms, but
adds: "To have 18 companies telling you they are going to hire 800 to 1,000
people in the coming year has got to be a trend. It's not just an aberration.
And this is happening in other places too."

   Burlington doesn't win every round. For example, water purification
specialists Zenon Environmental, long a star in the city's high-tech profile,
moved to larger quarters in Oakville despite widespread efforts to find a
suitable new location in Burlington.

   And the city spent $400,000 in an unsuccessful effort to land the mammoth
Mosel Vitelic silicon chip plant. The $2.5 billion operation and the 2,500 jobs
it is expected to create will be built in Montreal.

   But the city had developed a GTA Science Park concept in conjunction with the
Mosel bid, and that concept is alive and well. The city is talking to McMaster
University about a possible joint project.

   "We don't want to give up the idea of the science park. So we are now trying
to drive it from the university."

   For instance, McMaster is being recognized for its efforts in the area of
gene therapy and has received grants in connection with the research in terms of
commercial potential. "So it would be an excellent incubator approach to a
science park." The expertise and research at Mac would be a good match for any
companies in gene field technology and development.

   "This model for technology parks is to really base them around a university
to start off small and incubate the businesses. Growth companies can afford to
locate and share research."

   Either way, the city still has several hundred hectares available and lots of
room for high-tech companies.

   And the possibility of luring firms involved in gene research seems fitting
in Burlington, where they know that high-tech success can be hereditary.

   You can contact Brent Lawson by e-mail at blawson@hamiltonspectator.com or by
telephone at 905-526-2463.

   Top 10 high-tech firms Staff

   1. ABB Automation 555

   2. Cogeco Cable Systems 417

   3. Gennum Corporation 415

   4. Wescam Inc. 350

   5. Legato Systems Canada 215

   6. Wonderware Corporation 180

   7. Northrop Grumman 160

   8. Flow Automation 130

   9. Etratech Designs Inc. 120

   10. PSC Analytical Services 100

   Positions recently available include

   Computer programmer, technology development engineer, software developer,
audio specialist, animator, macromedia developer, computer-assisted design
engineer, managers for video and broadcast products, customer service
technician, design engineer, senior network administrator, technical support,
software engineer, information specialist.

   Source: Burlington Economic Development Corporation (www.
advantageburlington.com)

GRAPHIC: Photo: Photos by Barry Gray, the Hamilton Spectator; Tim Hanlon,
general manager of Hardsoft Systems Ltd. on Plains Road, examines a circuit
board. He sees Burlington as a good place to live, work and locate.; Photo:
Lauren Cuddy is president of Innovus Research Inc. on the North Service Road,
which tests pharmaceuticals. She found recruiting in Hamilton difficult.

LOAD-DATE: November 5, 2001


                              370 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2001 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                      March 13, 2001 Tuesday Final Edition

SECTION: CANADA & WORLD; Pg. D01

LENGTH: 704 words

HEADLINE: Ottawa seeks cloning laws; Draft legislation expected by May

SOURCE: The Canadian Press

BYLINE: Jim Brown

DATELINE: OTTAWA

BODY:

   The federal government may finally be ready to take another run at regulating
controversial genetic and reproductive technologies. That includes cloning and
stem cell research.

   The Liberals hope to have draft legislation -- details of which are still
under study -- before a Commons committee by May, a spokesman for Health
Minister Allan Rock confirmed yesterday.

   While the bill would deal with a host of reproductive issues, the cloning of
human embryos is the most controversial.

   Ottawa tried to outlaw the procedure in 1996, under legislation sponsored by
then health minister David Dingwall. That bill died on the Commons order paper
when the 1997 election was called and was never revived.

   Critics fear that, unless the legislative vacuum is filled, Canada may be
open to medically risky and ethically suspect ventures by researchers bent on
creating identical copies of human beings.

   That concern was heightened last week when two scientists from Italy and the
United States announced plans to clone a human within two years -- an indication
that technology may be about to outrun the law.

   Specific provisions of the draft bill contemplated by Rock have not been made
public, but the legislation is widely expected to reiterate the ban on human
cloning first proposed five years ago.

   The 1996 legislation would also have prohibited a range of other practices,
among them:

   * Rent-a-womb contracts in which a woman carries another couple's child for
profit. A number of Canadian women have advertised their availability for such
deals on the Internet, but it is not known how widespread the practice is.

   * Creation of animal-human hybrids, for example by inserting human genetic
material into an animal embryo or vice versa.

   * Commercial buying and selling of eggs, sperm and embryos for human
reproductive purposes.

   * Sex-selection of babies for non-medical reasons, simply to enhance the
chances that a couple will get a child of the gender they prefer.

   The prohibitions were backed by the threat of heavy fines and jail terms --
up to 10 years in prison and $500,000 for some offences.

   Some experts hope Ottawa will adopt a less heavy-handed approach this time,
relying more on regulation than on criminal penalties.

   "It was really quite Draconian (in 1996), it was almost irrational," said
Bernard Dickens, a specialist in medical and bioethics at the University of
Toronto.

   "I hope they get it better than they did last time. Then they felt they had
to do something, so they rushed in with all they could do under the criminal law
power."

   Jurisdictional considerations played a major role in the federal strategy.
Ottawa has sole constitutional authority over criminal law, but it must
collaborate with the provinces on health regulatory matters.

   Margaret Somerville, of the McGill University Centre for Medicine, Ethics and
Law, agrees criminal sanctions carry an unfortunate punitive image.

   But they also underline the seriousness of the issue and provide the federal
government with a tool to impose a national standard, she says. "We don't want
cloning to be done in Alberta but not in Ontario."

   Neither Dickens nor Somerville approve of what is known in the field as human
reproductive cloning -- the effort to create exact copies of existing human
beings.

   But they are quick to draw a distinction between that and so-called
therapeutic cloning.

   The latter could involve the use of stem cells from human embryos to generate
new organs -- for example, a liver to be transplanted into a patient whose own
is failing.

   Medical researchers in the Ottawa area are trying to raise $35 million to
create a Centre for Stem Cell and Gene Therapy that they hope will be in
operation within 18 months.

   They believe the government can help smooth the way by establishing a
regulatory framework they can live with. Rock's draft bill is expected to
address the issue.

   The legislation will go before the Commons health committee for public
hearings before it is submitted for formal debate in the full House. That
approach -- a reversal of the normal legislative process -- will allow wider
scope for amendments should experts find fault with any provisions.

LOAD-DATE: November 5, 2001


                              371 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2001 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                     March 7, 2001 Wednesday Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A05

LENGTH: 347 words

HEADLINE: McMaster expects up to $45m in new federal funds

SOURCE: The Hamilton Spectator

BYLINE: Suzanne Morrison, Medical Research Reporter

BODY:

   McMaster University has high hopes for a significant slice of $750 million
the federal government is investing in research and development.

   Gerhard Gerber, vice-president research and international affairs, expects
the university will receive $35 million to $45 million from the Canadian
Foundation for Innovation (CFI) for future projects.

   CFI funds are matched by the Ontario government. McMaster has received a
total of $152 million over the past three years. For example, last summer it got
$17.8 million in CFI funding for a centre doing gene therapy research.

   Gerber said such funding has a major impact on Hamilton's economy.

   "Most of that money is spent locally. A lot of it is going into salaries and
even local construction."

   Federal Industry Minister Brian Tobin and Finance Minister Paul Martin
announced yesterday that Ottawa is investing the additional $750 million in the
CFI, the agency that directs funding to universities, colleges and teaching
hospitals.

   The CFI program was created in 1997 to stop the steady erosion of research
and technology development in Canada. The program currently has $3.15 billion in
funding.

   Tobin said yesterday the investment is intended "to help Canada become among
the top five most research-intensive nations in the world."

   Canada is now at the bottom of the list of industrialized countries in the
proportion of its gross domestic product spent on research and development.

   Tobin said the government is aggressively trying to change that.

   A monumental effort will be required, given the enormous funding the United
States alone devotes to research.

   Dr. David Strangway, CFI president, said Canada must make major investments
to be competitive in the world.

   "There is a long way to go, but yesterday's announcement is a very big step.
It puts explicit commitment to earlier announcements by the finance minister,
prime minister and Mr. Tobin's office."

   You can contact Suzanne Morrison by e-mail at smorrison@hamiltonspectator.com
or by telephone at 905-526-3474.

LOAD-DATE: November 5, 2001


                              372 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2001 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                       March 2, 2001 Friday Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; Pg. C05

LENGTH: 629 words

HEADLINE: Briefly

SOURCE: The Hamilton Spectator

BODY:

   Deadly viruses fight disorder

   PHILADELPHIA -- Two of the world's deadliest viruses may hold the key to
developing an effective gene therapy for cystic fibrosis. Cystic fibrosis is an
inherited lung disorder that afflicts about 30,000 Americans.

   Scientists at the University of Pennsylvania reported promising results in
laboratory experiments that make use of a novel vector to deliver correct copies
of the gene that goes awry in cystic fibrosis.

   The vector is made with fragments of the genetic material from HIV, the virus
that causes AIDS, combined with a protein from the deadly Ebola virus.

   In experiments in cell culture and mice, James M. Wilson and colleagues at
Penn's Institute for Human Gene Therapy found that the vector could effectively
deliver a new gene to target cells.

   The work, reported in yesterday's issue of Nature Biotechnology, indicates
that it may be possible to overcome the technical problems that have plagued
nearly a decade of research into gene therapy for cystic fibrosis.

   U.S. health care needs repair

   WASHINGTON -- According to a report released yesterday by the non-profit
Institute of Medicine the American health care system is broken and urgently in
need of wholesale reform.

   "We are saying that the care the American population gets is not what they
should get," said Donald M. Berwick of Harvard Medical School, a member of the
expert panel that evaluated the state of U.S. health care. "The game is over.
It's time for a new system."

   Although health care workers strive hard to deliver quality care, the report
says the current fragmented system impedes communication and gives patients too
little input.

   Soil bacteria discovery

   WASHINGTON -- Genes extracted from soil bacteria and slipped into a
laboratory microbe have given pharmaceutical scientists a new source of a group
of natural compounds that are used to make several major drugs.

   The compounds -- polyketides -- used in drug production are usually made by
certain bacteria families. Manipulating the genes in these bacteria to cause
them to form particular types of the compounds has led to development of drugs
that now account for about $10 billion in annual sales.

   Many of the drug compounds are difficult to synthesize, so pharmaceutical
companies use natural organisms, such as soil bacteria, to make the drugs in
huge, industrial-sized vats.

   Solution to ringing in ears

   New research shows that changes in the brain's ability to prioritize
perceptions may cause some forms of ringing in the ears.

   Looking at patients whose tinnitus, or ringing in the ear, worsened when they
looked sideways, doctors found an imbalance between the auditory and visual
parts of the brain. Normally, the brain can pick which sense is more important
at that moment.

   The study suggests a new avenue for research into tinnitus, says lead author
R. F. Burkard. Doctors have long thought tinnitus may be "some kind of ear
itch," Burkard says. Instead, the noise may be present for many of us, but our
brains block it out so we never perceive it.

   The study appears in the current issue of Neurology.

   Blood clot protection

   A synthetic twist on the blood thinner heparin could offer more effective
clot protection after some surgeries with less risk of dangerous internal
bleeding.

   Researchers say hip replacement patients who received the experimental drug
called Org31540 had far less clotting than patients on the typical dose of
heparin. In addition, the new drug, which is under regulatory review in the
United States, appears to cause less internal bleeding, an occasional and
potentially serious complication of blood thinning therapy.

   The study appears in the latest New England Journal of Medicine.

   --Spectator news services

LOAD-DATE: November 5, 2001


                              373 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2001 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                    February 17, 2001 Saturday Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A05

LENGTH: 394 words

HEADLINE: Diabetes prediction improving; Alberta doctor says cell transplants
are giving diabetics hope

SOURCE: The Hamilton Spectator

BODY:

   Diabetes expert Dr. Edmond Ryan says blood tests can now help to predict
whether a person will develop diabetes.

   "If your immune system has been activated and if all the markers are present,
then one can predict with near certainty that one can get diabetes," said Ryan,
who is the medical director of the islet transplant program at the University of
Alberta Hospitals.

   "If none are activated, then it's very unlikely a person will develop
diabetes in the next few years."

   Ryan spoke Wednesday at McMaster University Medical Centre on new and
developing methods of treating diabetes.

   He also described gene therapy breakthroughs, new ways of testing blood
sugars and methods of preventing juvenile diabetes.

   Ryan said research studies are trying to detect and measure the indicators of
diabetes among relatives of diabetics.

   Edmonton researchers received international media attention last year after
they succeeded in getting 14 individuals with juvenile diabetes, which has its
onset in childhood, off insulin through islet cell transplants.

   Three of the 14 had to resume taking insulin, but their diabetes remains
stable, Ryan said.

   The islet cells in the pancreas are responsible for producing insulin.

   Diabetics either have no islet cells or insufficient numbers to naturally
produce insulin.

   He said islet cell transplants are not a cure because they require exchanging
insulin for potent immunosuppressive drugs.

   However, the transplants give diabetics hope that progress is being made in
fighting the disease, Ryan said.

   Meanwhile, Diabetes Hamilton, a public health initiative that helps diabetics
deal with the disease, has developed a directory of services in Hamilton.

   Dr. Hertzel Gerstein, who is the director of Diabetes Hamilton and an
associate professor of medicine at McMaster, said the comprehensive inventory of
services is unique in Canada.

   "This type of thing has never been done anywhere else," he said.

   The directory, which has been distributed to family doctors, provides
information on up to 40,000 resources for diabetics in Hamilton.

   Anyone who wants to register with Diabetes Hamilton or obtain more
information, is asked to call 525-9140, ext. 22351.

   More information on islet cell transplant research in Alberta is available on
the Internet at www.med.ualberta.ca/research/groups/islet.

LOAD-DATE: November 5, 2001


                              376 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2001 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                    February 13, 2001 Tuesday Final Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D01

LENGTH: 433 words

HEADLINE: New hope for Alzheimer's patients

SOURCE: Healthscout.Com

BYLINE: Fran Berger

BODY:

   Take some monkey cells, mix them with a little nerve growth factor, shoot
them back into the aging monkey's brain, and vital brain cell connections can be
restored to normal, a new study says. And, researchers say the technique should
work in humans, especially those with Alzheimer's disease.

   In fact, two Alzheimer's patients are already enrolled, and another six are
being recruited in the first human trial to test whether injecting genetically
modified cells directly into the brain can restore dying cells.

   The injected cells will be altered to produce nerve growth factor (NGF), a
naturally occurring substance found in all vertebrate animals.

   Alzheimer's is a progressive, degenerative disease that attacks brain cells
and impairs thinking, reasoning and memory.

   Researchers at the University of California in San Diego say the trial is one
part of gene therapy research on areas deep in the brain which support memory
and cognitive functions.

   "What we've done is take this monkey's skin cells through a biopsy and
reproduced them in culture, so he's not going to have an immune response. Then
the gene for nerve growth factor is put in the skin cells, and they produce the
factor. Those cells can then be put back any place in the body," says lead study
author James M. Conner, assistant professor in the department of neurosciences.

   Using a long needle, researchers injected the genetically modified cells deep
into the monkey's brain, next to atrophied nerve cells. After a few months, they
found the neurons in the brain had been restored to normal levels.

   Up to now, Conner says "the problem has been the method of delivery, to try
to put (the cells) into the brain directly. (Previously) it wound up affecting
the peripheral nervous system and pain sensors."

   Another major finding was a bit of a surprise to the research team: The
threadlike fibres (axons) of the nerve cells grew in a normal way, toward the
brain's outer surface, where short-term memory and mental activity take place.

   The fibres are vital for relaying messages to and from nerve cells in the
brain. It was a surprise because NGF tends to attract these long, threadlike
fibres, and researchers figured they might grow toward the implant instead of
out to the cortex.

   "We had a concern that ... the cell bodies would grow over to where you put
the factor in, and not where they needed to be, in the cortex, where they are
helping transmission," says Conner.

   "We were surprised that we didn't see the fibers had retracted, but expanded
back into the cortex, where they needed to be."

LOAD-DATE: November 5, 2001


                              378 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2001 Sun Media Corporation
                                The Toronto Sun

                    February 12, 2001, Monday, Final EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. 27

LENGTH: 386 words

HEADLINE: PILLS MAY REPLACE PRISONS: EXPERTS

BYLINE: AP

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:


   The genetic revolution made possible by mapping the human genome may include
new cures for drug addictions, treating mental illness and perhaps even
replacing prisons with pills, experts say.

   "Ultimately, the human genome sequence will revolutionize psychology and
psychiatry," says Dr. Peter McGuffin, co-author of an analysis in the upcoming
edition of the journal Science.

   "The sequencing of the human genome will improve our ability to identify the
genetic risk factors genes for a whole variety of conditions, from addiction to
criminality to anti-social personality," said Dr. Eric J. Nestler, chairman of
the department of psychiatry, University of Texas.

   MENTAL ILLNESS

   McGuffin, a researcher at the Institute of Psychiatry, Kings College London,
England, said many forms of mental illness are only poorly controlled with the
current medications. Identifying the genes that put people at risk "would be a
big advance in understanding what makes us susceptible to depression and
schizophrenia and so on."

   It is possible, McGuffin said, that drugs could be specifically tailored to
fit the unique pattern of genes in an individual patient.

   Nestler, co-author of an analysis in the journal Nature, said genetic therapy
could be a key advance in treating drug addiction.

   "At its core, addiction involves a biological process," said Nestler.
"Finding those genes means we will be able to identify people who are at risk of
addiction and target them for more intensive prevention intervention."

   CRIMINALS

   Experts believe there may even be genes that help explain why some people
become violent criminals while others, living in the same conditions, do not.

   "Some physicians already regard criminality as a disease while others hotly
dispute that," McGuffin said.

   "I don't think we can say that there will be a genetic panacea for all of
crime," he said. "I suspect not. But we might be able to tease out some genetic
aspects of criminal behaviour and target those with drugs."

   For instance, there are research suggestions that genes may play a role in
poor impulse control and aggression, both factors in violent crime.

   If such genes could be found and drugs developed to control them, people at
risk of becoming criminals could end up taking pills instead of going to prison.

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 2001


                              379 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2001 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                     February 9, 2001 Friday Final Edition

SECTION: CANADA & WORLD; Pg. C01

LENGTH: 608 words

HEADLINE: Scientist fears designer babies

SOURCE: The Independent, London

BYLINE: Steve Connor

DATELINE: LYONS, FRANCE

BODY:

   A disturbing description of a brave new world filled with designer babies
created by scientists with a mission to control human evolution was painted
yesterday by one of the leaders of the effort to decode the human genome.

   Dr. Francis Collins, director of the U.S. National Human Genome Research
Institute, says within 30 years there will be pressure on scientists to tinker
with genes of sperm and eggs to create genetically modified human embryos with
enhanced traits.

   "I find this interesting but somewhat chilling," Collins told the World Life
Sciences Forum in Lyons, France. "It implies someone knows what an improvement
is and it also implies we could be sure enough about the safety issues to
contemplate altering our very biology."

   At present, only gene therapy is allowed on "somatic" non-reproductive tissue
and Collins supports the existing moratorium on so-called "germline" gene
therapy on eggs, sperm and embryos because of safety concerns.

   "Perhaps in 20 years we may have learned how to practise gene therapy in the
germline that is safe. Right know we don't know how to do that. But if we were
successful in another 20 years it will be contemplated in a more serious way,"
he said.

   "I wouldn't be surprised that if in 30 years of being successful in this
business of how to manipulate the germline, that some people will start to argue
that we ought to take charge of our own evolution and we should not be satisfied
with our biological status and should as a species try to improve ourselves."

   Genetic enhancement cannot be done safely and predictably at present.

   Collins said: "The well-heeled couple who decided to do this today to have a
child who is going to be a wonderful musician and artist may find instead that
the child grows into a sullen adolescent who smokes marijuana and doesn't talk
to them."

   But with the full sequence of the human genome expected to be finished within
two years, a new era of genetic understanding has begun.

   "If all goes well, then perhaps the average life span will be extended to
something like 90 years which will put great stress on our social and economic
system," Collins said.

   "By 2010 we would have uncovered the hereditary contributions to most of the
common diseases that are frequent in our society and we will have genetic tests
for at least a dozen of those."

   Also within the next 10 years, a technique which is called pre-implantation
genetic diagnosis, when genes are tested in an early IVF embryo before the
embryo is put into the womb, will be widespread for genetic disorders.

   "Pre-implantation diagnosis will undoubtedly be practised in more centres and
what conditions this will be applied for will be fiercely debated over the
coming years," Collins said.

   To counter the possibility of a genetic underclass being created as a result
of testing for defective genes, Collins called for effective legislation to
prevent genetic discrimination. "(It) should be in place in 10 years and I hope
we won't have to wait nearly that long," he said.

   By 2020, Collins said, the common practice will be for patients to undergo a
battery of genetic tests before they are prescribed tailor-made drugs to suit
their individual make-up.

   "We are close to understanding the hereditary contributions to manic
depressive illness, to schizophrenia and to obsessive compulsive disorder in a
way that should lead to a better biological understanding of mental disorders,"
Collins said.

   "In 2030, if all goes well, we should have achieved a comprehensive,
genomics-based healthcare with individualised medicine instead of the
one-size-fits-all approach."

LOAD-DATE: November 5, 2001


                              382 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2001 Sun Media Corporation
                                The Toronto Sun

                    January 26, 2001, Friday, Final EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS, Pg. 87, SPORTS FLASHES

LENGTH: 564 words

HEADLINE: SPORTS FLASHES COLUMN

BODY:


   CURLERS IN THREE-WAY TIE

   Anne Merklinger, Sherry Middaugh and Michelle Pellegrin shared the lead with
5-2 records through the seventh draw yesterday at the Ontario women's curling
championship in Kingston.

   Merklinger, of the Rideau Curling Club, won two of three matches including a
9-4 decision over Tara George and her Fort William foursome in the evening draw,
bumping George out of a first-place tie.

   Middaugh's Coldwater rink easily handled Kathie Jackson's Fort Frances rink
9-2 in the evening draw to keep pace with Merklinger.

   Pellegrin, of the Royal Canadian Club, downed Nadine Landon of the Soo
Curlers Association 6-4 to grab a piece of top spot.

   Alison Goring of the Bayview Country Club won all three of her matches to
improve to 3-4 after an 0-4 start.

   "We just played better," Goring said. "When you play better, you make more
shots."

   - Alberta's Tom Reed won his final round-robin match at the Canadian Senior
curling championships and now awaits his opponent for the final.

   The Alberta rink capped an 11-0 performance in men's play yesterday.

   Reed's rink advanced directly to the men's final on Sunday (7 p.m., TSN),
when they will play the winner of tomorrow's semi-final between Manitoba's Gary
Ross and P.E.I.'s Ted MacFadyen.

   JURISPRUDENCE: SEX 'NOT CONSENTUAL'

   The teenager who accused Mark Chmura of assaulting her at a party later told
a friend she had sex against her will with the former NFL player, the friend
testified.

   "She said it was not consentual in any way. She said it hurt," the
18-year-old woman said during the first day of testimony in Chmura's sexual
assault trial.

   Chmura, 31, has pleaded not guilty to third-degree sexual assault and child
enticement, both felonies. He faces up to 40 years in prison and $ 20,000 in
fines if convicted.

   - Former Chicago Bears and New Orleans Saints head coach Mike Ditka has
become a part owner of the Chicago Rush of the Arena Football League.

   SOCCER: THUNDERHAWKS ROCK DETROIT

   Adolfo Mella scored four goals and Mauro Biello earned his 600th career NPSL
point as the Toronto ThunderHawks defeated the Detroit Rockers 12-8 at the
Hershey Centre. Toronto improved its record to 12-7 while the Rockers dropped to
4-17.

   OLYMPICS: SCIENCE FACT

   World doping experts and Olympic officials are joining forces with the
scientific community to stay ahead in what many believe will be the next
frontier in performance-enhancement -- genetic manipulation.

   A special conference on the potential misuse of gene therapy by athletes will
be held Sept. 23-26 in Cold Spring Harbor, N.Y.

   SKATING: PLUSHCHENKO PERFECT

   Yevgeny Plushchenko hit his unique quad-triple-double combination and another
quad toe to defend his European title in an emotional rivalry with fellow
Russian Alexei Yagudin.

   He earned perfect 6.0s for both technical and artistic merit, a feat rarely
achieved.

   In the ice dance, Italians Barbara Fusar Poli and Maurizio Margaglio earned a
6.0 for presentation for their original dance to take the lead going into the
final free dance today.

   BRIEFLY:

   - Deion Sanders has accepted a non-guaranteed minor-league contract to play
for the Cincinnati Reds triple-A team in Louisville.

   - Jamie Chamberlain scored with 4:35 left in the third period to lift the
Peterborough Petes to a 3-2 win over the visiting Barrie Colts in OHL action
last night.

LOAD-DATE: January 27, 2001


                              383 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2001 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                    January 25, 2001 Thursday Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A06

LENGTH: 733 words

HEADLINE: Mac gene research targets new therapy to treat cancer

SOURCE: The Hamilton Spectator

BYLINE: Suzanne Morrison, Medical Research Reporter

BODY:

   Researchers at McMaster University are unravelling the secrets of gene
therapy molecule by molecule.

   Dr. Jack Gauldie said scientists now know they can use genes as medicine and
can get away from pills by utilizing genes as a way of repairing the body.

   "Drug companies are pouring millions of dollars into developing new
approaches using the genetic information that's just been decoded (in the Human
Genome Project) and trying to put it into therapy for human diseases," he said.

   Gauldie said McMaster's Centre for Gene Therapeutics is one of only six
laboratories in the world investigating the special role dendritic cells may
play in treating breast, prostate and skin cancer.

   In this research, McMaster scientists are collaborating with others at the
Hamilton Regional Cancer Centre and Henderson Hospital in a search to find a way
of fighting cancerous tumours.

   So far, the research has turned up many positive responses that were never
expected, said Gauldie, chairman of pathology and molecular medicine.

   "We have been able to identify the correct cell and the correct gene. Now,
we've got to play around with the kind of process that is involved in skin,
prostate and breast cancer."

   The use of genes as medicine is one of the reasons behind the formation of
the Centre for Gene Therapeutics at McMaster.

   Britain OKs embryo cloning: B4

   The federal and provincial governments recently provided the university with
$30 million to build the new institute on the campus. It's where McMaster
scientists will pursue the development of new therapies using genetic
information. They are targeting cancer and inflammatory diseases of the lung and
bowel.

   Gauldie said Hamilton's hospitals and the university have made a major
commitment to gene therapeutics.

   "I think you will see much more of this coming out of the university in the
next 10 years."

   The research on gene therapy in Hamilton differs from stem-cell work, which
involves the use of embryos and is causing an uproar in Britain.

   This week, Britain's House of Lords backed new government rules on stem-cell
research that would allow limited cloning of human embryos, apparently turning a
deaf ear to religious leaders from across many faiths who oppose this
development.

   Peers in the British Parliament's upper chamber voted 212 to 92 to allow
research using stem cells to develop treatments for diseases such as leukemia
and Parkinson's.

   Debate raged for seven hours. But since members of Parliament in the elected
House of Commons passed the order by a majority of two to one late last year,
the limited cloning rules will now become law.

   Prime Minister Tony Blair has argued the move allows Britain to stay in the
forefront of the booming biotechnology industry. But right-to-life groups and
religious leaders see it as the first step toward full human cloning.

   Britain's health minister vowed the government would create legislation to
ensure full human cloning never happens, even though safeguards are already in
place.

   Canada has no legislation to cover stem-cell research.

   Dr. Mark Bisby, director of pro-grams for the Canadian Institutes of Health
Research (CIHR) in Ottawa, said that because of this legislative gap most of the
researchers in Canada are being extremely careful.

   "They see this (lack of regulation) as an amber light and they need to be
very cautious," Bisby said.

   Next week, the CIHR's working group on stem-cell research will release its
first discussion paper on the issue.

   The document will set out preliminary recommendations on stem-cell research,
an area of science that presents all sorts of ethical challenges.

   A number of other countries have commissioned in-depth studies on the issue.
Guidelines have been drawn up in the United States and Britain.

   In Canada, a report was published in 1998 providing guidance for research
involving human reproductive tissues and embryos. However, it made no specific
reference to research with stem cells, which have a broad range of potential
therapeutic uses for conditions such as spinal cord injury, diabetes, arthritis
and heart disease.

   Gauldie said research at Mac isn't tampering with the background of the human
genome. "It's trying to fix something that happens to be broken."

   You can contact Suzanne Morrison by e-mail at smorrison@hamiltonspectator.com
or by telephone at 905-526-3474.

GRAPHIC: Photo: Ron Pozzer, the Hamilton Spectator; Research assistant Jennifer
Long is helping to develop gene-based treatments for cancer and other diseases
at McMaster University's Centre for Gene Therapeutics.

LOAD-DATE: November 5, 2001


                              384 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2001 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                    January 25, 2001 Thursday Final Edition

SECTION: FORECAST 2001; Pg. BB05

LENGTH: 1424 words

HEADLINE: Health-care boosting economy; Jobs created by thriving hospitals fuel
city's growth

SOURCE: The Hamilton Spectator

BYLINE: John Mentek

BODY:

   To describe health services as an engine of economic growth seems wrong,
somehow -- a sin against the altruism of research and care.

   Yet dollars are as crucial to health services as they are steelmakers. And
successful hospitals area actually important elements of economic growth in the
areas they inhabit.

   Hamilton is blessed with economic spinoffs from both heavy industry and a
world-class health services sector. The obvious spinoffs are jobs, of course,
but for the medical sector the spinoffs also include major, multi-million dollar
grants funding knowledge-based research which can in turn lead to products and
multi-million dollar investments from companies seeking to bring the fruits of
medical research to market.

   Locally, Hamilton Health Sciences Corporation, St. Joseph's Hospital and the
Hamilton Regional Cancer Centre retain plenty of economic clout even after the
turmoil of restructuring.

   HHSC is still the largest single employer in the city, with about 8,200 staff
and 1,000 medical personnel. It's among Canada's largest academic health-care
centres and the largest provider of comprehensive health services in Ontario.

   HHSC's annual budget is nearly half a billion dollars.

   Meanwhile, St. Joseph's Hospital's 14 operating rooms are among Canada's
busiest. Some 40 per cent of cancer surgeries in the central-west Ontario are
performed here, 20 per cent of the province's kidney transplants, and 4,000
babies are delivered here each year.

   The Firestone Institute for Respiratory Health is one of the top three
respirology clinics in the world, and examines more than 20,000 people each year
year.

   The Centre of Gene Therapy and Immune Modulation was established with grants
in the millions of dollars from the Ontario Research and Development Challenge
Fund to look at ways of introducing genes into the body to fight disease.

   The Father Sean O'Sullivan Research Centre at St. Joseph's Hospital is a
major cancer research centre, while individual researchers like Dr. Herzel
Gerstein are attracting multi-million dollar research contracts to Hamilton.

   Dr. Gerstein was awarded $9.7 million (U.S.) by the National Institute of
Health in America for a study of heart disease in diabetics.

   Health-care services in Hamilton are robust, but when looking at it bear in
mind that the portion of health-care spending funded by government is always
competing with other government spending priorities, including debt reduction
and plain old tax breaks.

   HHSC's interim President and Chief Executive Officer, Bill MacLeod, suggests
the health-care sector's heavy reliance upon government funding means it won't
be a huge growth sector like technology has been in some parts of the world,
particularly since so many people are clamouring for a piece of the government
pie.

   "If you look at the non-government health-care spending, things like
complimentary therapies, non-OHIP health-care providers, and other aspects of
health care that are not government funded, I think you're seeing a continued
and sustained growth," MacLeod said.

   On the other hand, "We're seeing quite substantial investments being made in
the research side of health care."

   For instance, the Firestone Institute got $17 million in grants to expand its
clinic and research services.

   An inductee into the Canadian Medical Hall of Fame, named to the Order of
Canada, and last year's recipient of the prestigious Gairdner Award for
achievement in medical science, Dr. Jack Hirsh believes health services
including medical research will continue to be a very important economic engine
for this area.

   Hirsh was honoured last year for his pioneering contributions to diagnosis,
treatment and prevention of problems associated with thrombosis, or blood clots,
and vascular disease. His insights and research -- done here in Hamilton -- are
now in use around the world.

   Dr. Hirsh sees the tertiary care referral role of hospitals in Hamilton
continuing and growing.

   On the research side, he said the Centre of Gene Therapy "is going to bring a
lot of molecular biologists interested in gene therapy into Hamilton."

   Dr. Hirsh's own centre for research into a major cause of heart attack and
stroke is also thriving -- currently employing 140 people and growing as
research grants flow in.

   Hamilton is very strong in clinical research, "but we also have people who
are doing outstanding basic science research," said MacLeod.

   We're behind major Canadian research centres like Toronto, Montreal and
Vancouver, but not by much. MacLeod puts Hamilton on par with London, Ontario in
terms of health-sciences research activity and funding.

   The phenomenon of technology diffusion almost guarantees no one centre will
long have a single medical procedure or piece of equipment to itself for long.

   Once, only academic centres did joint replacements, but now any reasonably
sized community hospital has orthopedic surgeons doing joint replacements.

   The nature of research in the health sciences centres is to develop, improve
or enhance technology in the health science centres, and then it is spun off to
other centres.

   MacLeod said the long-term plan for Hamilton's cancer centre is to develop
satellite cachement points -- in St. Catharines and in Kitchener.

   Marcel Mongeon, executive director and legal counsel in the Office of
Research Contracts and Intellectual Property at McMaster University, said the
close collaboration between Hamilton's hospitals, staff and the Faculty of
Health Science is crucial for attracting world-class researchers and research
money.

   It helped bring one of the world's leading cardiologists -- Dr. Salim Yussuf
-- to Hamilton from the National Institute of Health in Washington. Dr. Yussuf
is in the process of forming a Population Health Institute.

   Only the best grants are funded, said MacLeod, and collaboration means
researchers in this area can develop and strengthen their competitive position
vis-a-vis other centres.

   "By co-operating, we can actually compete better with bigger centres like
Toronto, Montreal, Vancouver and centres in Alberta."

   Hospital restructuring has meant working conditions in health-care services
is much harder now.

   "It's partly what we're seeing the world over," said Dr. Hirsh. "Health is so
expensive, that whether health care so-called industry is run by government, or
run by third parties, both are trying to maintain spending."

   Balanced against that are public expectations -- people want the best from
their health-care system. And as technology improves, and public expectations
rise, doctors can do more, but what is being done is expensive.

   So the government that provides most of the money for health-care services
and research is now in the position of having to pick and choose what kind of
health care it will fund -- and what it will ignore.

   Given that scenario, "I think we've adapted very, very well," Dr. Hirsh said.
A complicating factor in all of this is the fact that projections done a decade
and a half ago which indicated Canada would be overrun with doctors by the new
century have proven to be dramatically wrong.

   "We're woefully under-doctored, and there's a lot of competition for doctors
throughout Ontario and throughout the rest of Canada."

   Nevertheless, Dr. Hirsh sees three main components to the economic engine of
health care, and he says in Hamilton, none have stalled.

   First, it's the hospitals, which will continue to employ health care workers.
"Hamilton will remain a tertiary care centre (a centre requiring highly skilled
health-care professionals, special equipment and facilities)."

   Second is McMaster University's Faculty of Health Sciences, and the
university itself, providing training in pure science and medicine.

   Third are the research centres that have sprung up and continue to spring up
in the city.

   "We're extremely fortunate. We will have four world-class, outstanding
research centres all of which employ people in the knowledge-based industries."

   As they add to their knowledge base, they begin to spin off companies.

   Companies like Vascular Therapeutics Inc., bought by a Toronto-based
biopharmaceutical company for an initial sum of $15 million.

   VTI researches new heart drugs and operates out of the Hamilton Civic
Hospitals Research Centre -- where Dr. Hirsh is director.

   "We need to do more of that, "Dr. Hirsh added. "More of what (the University)
of Waterloo has done successfully, and we need to do that in partnership with
the city."

GRAPHIC: Photo: Ted Brellisford, the Hamilton Spectator; McMaster Medical Centre
is part of the local health-services sector which has economic clout in terms of
jobs and multi-million dollar research investment.

LOAD-DATE: November 5, 2001


                              385 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2001 Sun Media Corporation
                                The Toronto Sun

                   January 25, 2001, Thursday, Final EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1090 words

HEADLINE: HARRIS' VISION PREMIER BEGINS HIS CAMPAIGN FOR 3RD TERM

BYLINE: JAMES WALLACE

BODY:


   Premier Mike Harris has already began to "campaign" for the next provincial
election, he told The Toronto Sun in an exclusive interview yesterday.

   Harris plans to mount "an aggressive, perhaps controversial agenda" that will
include tax cuts to match those expected in U.S. jurisdictions, a possible
provincial sales tax cut and profound changes to Ontario's health-care system.

   Harris gathered hundreds of Progress Conservative supporters to a Toronto
hotel yesterday to launch what he billed as the largest public political
consultation in Canadian history.

   The point of rallying Tory MPPs to hold endless town hall meetings, of
setting up Web sites and mailing out surveys and otherwise dip into the deep
well that is the party coffers, is to prepare the party for the next 15 years in
general and the next provincial election in particular.

   Harris told The Sun yesterday, in no uncertain terms, that he will lead the
party in that election.

   "This is to get ready for the future and undoubtedly to be ready for 2015 and
some of these dramatic changes that are going to take place will require an
ambitious, an aggressive perhaps controversial agenda," Harris said.

   "I'm a big believer in putting an agenda before the people," he said.

   "If I get a mandate for it, then I can implement it," Harris said. "I'm
starting to campaign."

   After nearly six years in power, the Harris government has kept most of its
major promises, leading some critics to suggest the steam has left from the
Common Sense Revolution.

   SIGNIFICANT CHANGES

   The government has cut taxes significantly, eliminated Ontario's deficit,
balanced the provincial budget and overhauled the welfare system. Major
health-care and education reforms are also under way.

   Harris argued that the policies that underpinned the Common Sense Revolution
may have become dated.

   "I don't think the ideas and the policies and the concepts that allowed you
to play catchup with the rest of the world ... are going to be the same over the
next five years," he said.

   The point of the Tory navel gazing, he said, is not to watch the party drift
from revolutionaries to evolutionaries, but to find ways to deal with the
province's debt, the slowing North American economy and the technological boom
in science, medicine and business.

   "I think this exercise will lead to revolutionary new ideas again," he said.

   Harris recalled the "stimulative" budget proposed by former NDP treasurer
Floyd Laughren in 1991 that was intended to shock Ontario out of recession with
government spending.

   "That worked 10 years before, 10 years later it was a disaster," Harris said.

   "He was out of step with all the other provinces, he was out of step with the
NDP in Saskatchewan, he was out of step with the Liberals in the Maritimes
because times had changed then, from five or 10 years before," he said.

   "Times have changed now, since the Common Sense Revolution," Harris said.

   He hopes to avoid the mistakes of the past by looking ahead, particularly in
health care.

   "If you look in health care, the big challenges we faced were to keep pace,
modernizing hospitals, long-term care," Harris said.

   "They were built on a 50-year model that every hospital had to do
everything," he said.

   "Gradually there has been some specialization but there hadn't been a really
good look at that and a rebuild with modern equipment."

   New drugs, gene therapy, science fiction in the days Harris was growing up,
will radically alter health care over the next 15 years, Harris said.

   "I have people coming to me and saying you won't need any Sick Kids hospital
anymore, kids won't be sick, we'll have that fixed before they're born," he
said.

   "We have to be aware that's happening and that research is happening and what
do we have to do next as a government to have a health-care system that is ready
to respond to that."

   The private sector will play a role in the future but what role still has to
be determined, Harris said.

   In his 1991, New Directions policy paper Harris said government couldn't deal
with complex health-care problems without "more private-sector involvement."

   That debate still needs to be examined, he said.

   "They're certainly going to be involved, the question is are they going to be
involved contra our understanding of the Canada Health Act," Harris said.

   However, that doesn't mean turning health care over to private interests, he
added.

   "I've not seen a plan more efficient, more effective or better than ours
within the Canada Health Act," Harris said.

   "Will that still be the same 15 years from now, I don't know that. I don't
think I can rule anything out going in."

   On tax cuts, Harris said he'll cut taxes to ensure Ontario remains
competitive with the U.S. and other provincial jurisdictions.

   With U.S. President George W. Bush promising tax cuts, Harris may have to
sharpen his pencil sooner rather than later.

   "It's clear to us tax cuts are everybody's mantra now," he said. "We're
confident the same strategy that allowed us to compete will allow us to weather
any downturn. If other jurisdictions are tax competitive, we're going to have to
be more tax competitive."

   While the government has so far favoured cuts to income and payroll taxes as
the best way to stimulate the economy, Harris said he will consider a cut to
provincial sales taxes, something he promised in his 1991 New Directions policy
book.

   POLITICAL FUTURE

   "It's possible, it could be sales taxes," he said.

   Finally, Harris addressed the chronic rumours surrounding his political
future and potential successors from his cabinet.

   "It's natural that sort of half way through, which is about where I put my
career at this point, that other cabinet ministers would begin to think about
aspirations, I remember that," he said.

   "In the early '80s, I wasn't one of those, I was too much of a rookie but
there were the Timbrells and the Grossmans and the Millers who were saying well,
I don't think Bill Davis will stay forever.

   "And clearly I won't stay forever either. Either the people will have
something to say about that or I will. But, it's certainly not today and not
before the next election."

   Health-care and education reforms are only partially under way and now that
the deficit has been slain, Ontario's $ 110-plus billion debt looms large and
the government has its fingers in many other pies. "I'm only halfway through
some of the these changes," Harris said.

   "They've been started but the job is not yet finished."

GRAPHIC: 2 photos by Fred Thornhill 1. REVOLUTIONARY?... An upbeat Mike Harris
tells a PC gathering of his extensive plans, including a possible sales tax cut.
2. The premier holds up a pamphlet spelling out what it's all about -- seizing
tomorrow's opportunities.

LOAD-DATE: January 25, 2001


                              386 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2001 Sun Media Corporation
                         Edmonton Sun (Alberta, Canada)

                    January 23, 2001, Tuesday, Final EDITION

SECTION: EDITORIAL/OPINION, Pg. 1, LETTERS TO THE EDITOR

LENGTH: 784 words

HEADLINE: LETTERS TO THE EDITOR COLUMN

BODY:


   THE RECENT resignation of Lucien Bouchard and the continuing threat of Quebec
hardliners suggests a new approach to Quebec separatism. It seems that very few
people, including me, have any idea of what separation would mean to both Quebec
and the Rest of Canada (ROC). I would suggest both Quebec and the ROC appoint a
three-person body backed with appropriate staff to negotiate the terms of
possible separation. If that negotiation is carried out publicly and with
sufficient media attention, we will finally understand just what separation will
mean for both sides. Everyone will understand what both sides win and lose. I
would suggest the negotiations will take many years to reach agreement and
during that time interest in separation will finally be put to rest.

   Julian Kinisky

   (Each generation will view this tug of war differently.)

   BEAT PATROL policing is working to keep street prostitution from taking root,
but the policing of escorts is another matter. Escorts and their johns are
highly mobile and speedily dispatched using high-tech communications. However,
the sex trade is such that no matter how you address the issue, escorts are now
licensed by the city but their employees are not government workers and are not
deemed "essential services." Call-girls in taxis report to hotels for duty and
big pay but johns who phone escorts more than likely will pick up the escort for
sex in their vehicles. Why doesn't Alberta's Justice Minister Dave Hancock make
it illegal to have sex in a public place in a publicly accessed motor vehicle?
Stiffer fines for johns and vehicle seizures may result. Perhaps johns will
think twice when cheap sex is a thing of the past.

   Thomas J. Tomilson

   (It'll likely take a lot more than a law to stop the sex trade.)

   RE: "THIS little piggie ... went for transplant," Jan. 14. Unless the intent
of animal organs is to replace the need for human organs, animal-to-human organ
transplants (xenotransplantation) is not the answer to the organ shortage.
Xenotransplantation cannot reduce the growing disparity of numbers between
humans who supply organs and those who need them. At best, it may have the
potential to prolong a patient's life until a human organ becomes available.
Unless there is a national commitment to improving Canada's organ donation rate,
patients will be forced to rely on non-human organs. Because no such program
exists, xenotransplantation will result in longer waiting lists. The solution is
to take immediate progressive measures to reduce the demand (disease prevention
and promoting healthy living) and emphasize organ donation. Secondly, with
xenotransplantation the complex and ethical issues surrounding the supply of
human organs, including who is responsible for obtaining them and donor consent,
are non-existent because the organs are not human. Let's face it, no healthy
person walks into a hospital to donate their heart. Hence looking to the animal
kingdom for answers becomes an attractive and ethically challenging endeavour.
If our society is resolved to find an animal species that would supply organs,
every animal species is at our disposal. The challenge becomes how to make the
human body accept non-human organs. Ideally any replacement organ must be
similar to the one it replaces. Researchers have historically looked at
primates, but because of the genetic similarities they share with us, we have
been morally obliged to reject them as a source of organs. Now, with the help of
biotechnology, they have turned their focus to pigs. They believe that by
artificially creating these similarities - inserting human genetic material into
the pig's makeup - we will elevate their status from merely a source of food to
a source of organs. But why not genetically modify primates? The animal
protection movement opposes genetic manipulation of life. We view
xenotransplantation and other forms of experimental genetic research (gene
therapy and cloning) as a stepping-stone to human genetic research. Regardless
of the perceived benefits, it is imperative that society condemn the genetic
manipulation of all life, otherwise we will be forced to deal with the
implications and consequences of this technology.

   Jacqui Barnes, director, Animal Alliance of Canada

   (More human donors would surely be the best answer.)

   TOM ELSWORTHY'S Jan. 21 column was right on. I have complained to EPCOR,
Mayor Bill Smith and city council. If EPCOR was setting "very fine print" quota
limitations for their contract offerings, EPCOR should have automatically moved
the surplus applications from one offering into the next offering. What could be
more reasonable or fair than that?

   Bud Squair

   (Indeed.)

LOAD-DATE: January 23, 2001


                              388 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2001 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                     January 22, 2001 Monday Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; Pg. C04

LENGTH: 612 words

HEADLINE: Controversial stem cell research 'very hot'

SOURCE: The Canadian Press

BYLINE: Dennis Bueckert

DATELINE: OTTAWA

BODY:

   Canadian scientists are poised for a major push into one of the hottest and
most controversial areas of modern medicine -- stem cell research.

   But they say they're being held back by the lack of federal regulations or
guidelines in a field whose promise is accompanied by potentially explosive
ethical questions.

   Embryonic stem cells, derived from the earliest developmental stages of an
embryo, have the ability to develop into virtually any type of body cell.

   "This is a very hot, up-and-coming field," Ron Worton, head of the Ottawa
Hospital Research Institute, said.

   "It's clear an embryonic stem cell can make any and every tissue. It can make
blood, your liver, your kidneys, your brain, your lungs -- everything."

   Worton, co-discoverer of the gene that causes Duchenne muscular dystrophy, is
excited at the possibility of rebuilding muscle in victims of MD.

   In the past two years, scientists have learned that stem cells in adult
tissues, while not as potent as those from an embryo, can also give rise to many
useful tissues. They believe stem cells from one part of a person's body might
eventually be used to regenerate tissue needed somewhere else.

   "If we could take bone marrow cells and put them into muscles and have them
rebuild muscle, that would be amazing," Worton said.

   Animal experiments have produced highly promising results, but work with
human cells is in the very early stages. Still, excitement is growing.

   Worton has assembled $35 million in funding for a Centre for Stem Cell and
Gene Therapy that will open in Ottawa by mid 2002. He also proposes a national
research network and is confident of support of other scientists.

   "Altogether that's going to take Canada from being relatively nowhere in
terms of the overall stem cell work to being a world leader," he said.

   The biggest problem is researchers need to work with cells from human
embryos, at least in the early stages.

   "Any time you do research on fetal tissue involving embryos there's an
understandable hesitancy on the part of the researchers," says Tim Caulfield, a
University of Alberta law professor. "Part of it is an intuitive hesitancy,
because they understand and respect the significance of the tissue they're
working with, but part of it also is that they're working within somewhat of a
regulatory vacuum."

   Britain and the United States have introduced guidelines for stem cell
research; some countries have effectively banned it. In Canada it is unclear.

   In 1993, the Royal Commission on New Reproductive Technologies recommended
tight regulations to govern the use of fetal tissue, but they were never
implemented.

   Ethicists agree a woman's decision about abortion should not be tainted by
the question of providing material for research purposes, Caulfield said.

   But he raised questions about tissue from a fetus that has already been
aborted, material that would otherwise be treated as medical waste.

   Also, there are thousands of surplus frozen embryos in storage at fertility
clinics across the country. Many will eventually be disposed of under current
practices. But there's no procedure for getting access to them for research
purposes.

   A scenario most researchers oppose is people could produce in-vitro embryos
specifically for use in research. "We don't want that to happen," Worton said.

   "We desperately do not want to see that happen."

   Sources say some Canadian labs, frustrated with the lack of government
guidance, have already quietly begun work on human stem cells.

   The Canadian Institutes of Health Research is expected to recommend
guidelines soon, but political decisions will still be needed.

LOAD-DATE: November 5, 2001


                              389 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2001 Sun Media Corporation
                                The Toronto Sun

                    January 22, 2001, Monday, Early EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. 17

LENGTH: 462 words

HEADLINE: MIRACLE CELLS IN ETHICS GRIDLOCK LACK OF GUIDELINES STYMIES
RESEARCHERS

BYLINE: DENNIS BUECKERT, THE CANADIAN PRESS

DATELINE: OTTAWA

BODY:


   Canadian scientists are poised for a major push into one of the hottest and
most controversial areas of modern medicine -- stem cell research -- but they
say they're being held back by the lack of federal regulations or guidelines.

   Embryonic stem cells, derived from the earliest developmental stages of an
embryo, have the ability to develop into virtually any type of body cell.

   "This is a very hot, up-and-coming field," Ron Worton, head of the Ottawa
Hospital Research Institute, said.

   "It's clear an embryonic stem cell can make any and every tissue. It can make
blood, your liver, your kidneys, your brain, your lungs -- everything."

   Worton, co-discoverer of the gene that causes Duchenne muscular dystrophy, is
excited at the possibility of rebuilding muscle in sufferers of that disease.

   He has assembled $ 35 million in funding for a Centre for Stem Cell and Gene
Therapy that will open in Ottawa within 18 months.

   He has also proposed a national research network and is confident of support
from other scientists across the country.

   "Altogether that's going to take Canada from being relatively nowhere in
terms of the overall stem cell work to being a world leader," he said.

   But the biggest problem is that researchers need to work with cells from
human embryos, at least in the early stages, and they're hesitant to do so
without guidelines.

   Britain and the United States have introduced guidelines for stem cell
research; some countries have banned it. The situation in Canada is unclear.

   In 1993 the Royal Commission on New Reproductive Technologies recommended
tight regulations on the use of fetal tissue, but they were never implemented.

   Ethicists agree that a woman's decision about abortion should not be tainted
by the question of providing material for research purposes.

   Tim Caulfield, law professor at the University of Alberta, raised questions
about tissue from a fetus that has already been aborted, material which would
otherwise be treated as medical waste.

   Also, there are thousands of surplus frozen embryos in storage at fertility
clinics across the country.

   One scenario, distasteful to most researchers, is that people could produce
in-vitro embryos specifically for use in research.

   EXPECTED SOON

   Some Canadian labs, frustrated with the lack of government guidance, have
reportedly already quietly begun work on human stem cells.

   The National Institute of Health Research is expected to recommend guidelines
soon.

   Health Minister Allan Rock's office will not say whether there are plans to
reintroduce legislation on new genetic and reproductive technologies in the
coming session of Parliament.

   That will be revealed in the throne speech. Two previous bills have died on
the order paper.

GRAPHIC: photo of ALLAN ROCK Not saying

LOAD-DATE: January 22, 2001


                              391 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2001 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                     January 12, 2001 Friday Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 728 words

HEADLINE: Geneticists alter monkey makeup; Researchers create the first
genetically modified primate in a bid to cure diseases.

SOURCE: The Hamilton Spectator

BYLINE: Suzanne Morrison, Medical Research Reporter

BODY:

   American researchers have created the world's first genetically modified
monkey, an advance that carries with it the potential to cure devastating
diseases like cystic fibrosis.

   The three-month-old male baby rhesus monkey called ANDi -- whose name spells
"inserted DNA" backwards -- was produced by inserting a new gene into a monkey
egg, then fertilizing it.

   Researchers at the Oregon Primate Regional Center believe it's the first time
techniques of genetic engineering have been used to alter an unfertilized egg in
the human family -- that is, primates -- with the intention of passing that
change on to future generations.

   Their work appears in the today's issue of the journal Science.

   Dr. Patricia Chang, a geneticist at McMaster University, said the successful
procedure in an animal that's so close to humans "indicates the feasibility of
doing the same thing in humans is much higher."

   Chang said the birth of ANDi raises the possibility of curing some of the
more than 3,000 inherited diseases, and gives scientists an animal model to work
with.

   For example, by inserting the gene for Alzheimer's disease, researchers could
manipulate treatment to protect a monkey from developing symptoms of the
disease.

   "Then, the likelihood of using the same strategy to cure human Alzheimer's
disease would be very high," said Chang, a professor of pediatrics. "It opens up
a new direction (and) a whole different approach."

   Critics quickly raised opposition.

   "Before it was mice. Now, monkeys, both cloned and gene-altered," said Eric
Kleiman, research director of Defense of Animals, an international animal
advocacy group based in Mill Valley, Calif. "It's pretty clear who is next. And
it will be just as reprehensible when people are manufactured to suit
experimenters."

   Chang agrees the creation of ANDi brings society one step farther along a
slippery slope. "What we are doing is having the potential to alter human
inheritance and that has the potential to create all kinds of eugenics
problems."

   To create ANDi, scientists used 224 eggs, inserting an extra marker gene,
which shows up as a green fluorescent protein (GFP). Eggs were fertilized by
injection with a rhesus monkey's sperm, resulting in 40 embryos. Those embryos
were transferred to 20 surrogates, resulting in five pregnancies and, ultimately
three, live births.

   ANDi was one of three healthy male babies -- but the only one with the
genetic modification, confirmed through cells taken from his cheek, hair, urine,
placenta and birth cord.

   One stillborn monkey in the Oregon experiment had fluorescent green
fingernails and hair. But ANDi doesn't glow, even though tests show the inserted
genes are present in his body.

   Chang said scientists will have to follow this carefully.

   "It may mean you can put in whatever foreign gene you want, and show it's in
there. But, as long as it's being kept quiet, as in ANDi's case, you're OK.

   "But, if it's active, you may come up with a whole set of new problems, such
as stillbirths. This is ... something that we definitely have to keep in mind,"
Chang said.

   Scientists have created gene-altered fruit flies, rabbits, sheep, goats,
cattle, pigs and other animals since the first such, a mouse, was created in
1976.

   Dr. Gerald Schatten, senior author of the report in Science and a professor
of obstetrics, gynecology, cell and developmental biology at Oregon Health
Sciences University, said the gene he inserted in ANDi is just a test case.

   His ultimate goal is to create colonies of monkeys, with each one genetically
modified to develop a human disease. He would use the animals to study new ways
to treat humans for the disease.

   The Oregon scientists say ANDi is frisky and playing normally.

   Dr. Jack Gauldie, who heads a leading-edge centre on gene therapy at
McMaster, said ANDi is "as close to the human as you are going to get."

   He said the importance of the accomplishment is that the resulting animal
appears normal. "So, the manipulation they undertook to get DNA in there didn't
apparently interfere with the makeup of the monkey."

   Gauldie, speaking at a Rotary luncheon yesterday, said all of our lives will
be touched by some form of gene therapy in the next five years.

   You can contact Suzanne Morrison by e-mail at smorrison@hamiltonspectator.com
or by phone at (905) 526-3474.

GRAPHIC: Photo: reuters; ANDi: Genetically modified.

LOAD-DATE: November 5, 2001


                              397 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                    December 28, 2000 Thursday Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH & SCIENCE; Pg. B04

LENGTH: 573 words

HEADLINE: Stem cells point to therapy advance; Two transplant cell-types found

SOURCE: The Canadian Press

BYLINE: Anne-Marie Tobin

DATELINE: TORONTO

BODY:

   Canadian researchers have discovered two types of stem cells within the blood
system. It's a finding that could eventually help patients undergoing
transplants or gene therapy receive the most appropriate kind of stem cells.

   Scientists at Toronto's Hospital for Sick Children found that human stem
cells differ in how they work after a transplant -- some function for the first
month and then disappear, while others begin to function after several months
but appear to keep working.

   The findings are reported in the January issue of the scientific journal
Nature Immunology.

   "There was one kind of stem cell that was very promptly active right after
transplant, but it would be transient, it would sort of go away after a period
of time," Dr. John Dick, a geneticist who led the team, said in an interview
yesterday.

   "And then there was another class of stem cells that would take some period
of time to get going. But once it got going, it would be permanent, it would be
more long lived."

   Dick said the study provides a more solid understanding of how the human
blood system works.

   Stem cells are the cells from which the entire blood system grows. Stem cell
transplants -- a form of bone marrow transplant -- are used widely for treating
different types of cancer, anemia and auto-immune disorders.

   Nowadays, they're also seen as a source of potential therapy for people with
a variety of genetic disorders.

   "There's an explosion of interest in harnessing the power of stem cell
transplantation," Dick said.

   "Everybody knows about bone marrow transplants in cancer patients, but people
want to do gene therapy -- use things like (umbilical) cord blood to
transplant."

   To increase the supply of stem cells for transplant, scientists would like to
be able to culture them in a lab dish, he said.

   "This now provides a way that people can target the kind of stem cells that
they want," he said. "For most applications that's going to be the long-term
kind but ... I think that there could be applications for the short-term kind as
well."

   The long-term repopulating stem cells could be used for transplants to
correct genetic disorders or in some kinds of cancer therapy, he said.

   However, Dick said short-term repopulating stem cells could play a role, for
instance, in generating new blood cells after cancer patients have their blood
systems damaged by large doses of chemotherapy.

   In an accompanying editorial, U.S. scientists Ihor Lemischka and Craig Jordan
wrote that finding and characterizing the relatively rare stem cell is the
scientific equivalent of looking for a needle in a haystack.

   They said the Sick Kids research gives "the most compelling characterization
of human stem cells to date."

   Over the last decade, Dick's group has developed a system to reproduce the
entire human blood system in mice. By transplanting human blood cells into
special immune-deficient mice which can't reject the human cells, they've
managed to study how stem cells function.

   Other members of the team are Dr. Guillermo Guenechea, Dr. Olga Gan and
graduate student Craig Dorrell.

   More work needs to be done to figure out things such as the ratio of short-to
long-term repopulating stem cells in the body, or whether the ratio changes as
someone grows from newborn to adult.

   "We're just at the bottom of the mountain looking up," Dick said. "But now,
at least we know there's a mountain there."

LOAD-DATE: November 5, 2001


                              402 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                    December 9, 2000 Saturday Final Edition

SECTION: OBSERVER; Pg. D02

LENGTH: 526 words

HEADLINE: What's news? / A current events quiz

SOURCE: Special to The Spectator

BYLINE: Regina Haggo and Douglas Haggo

BODY:

   1. According to researchers at the College of Nursing, Brigham Young
University, what kind of uniform do Americans want nurses to wear?

   a) A pink-striped pant suit with some pens in the breast pocket

   b) Anything that makes a nurse feel comfortable

   c) A white pant suit with a stethoscope worn around the neck

   d) Something resembling what Florence Nightingale wore

   e) Green scrubs with a stethoscope dangling from a back pocket

   2. Who is Hamilton-Wentworth's medical officer of health?

   a) Brad Clark

   b) Hedy Fry

   c) Barb Mersereau

   d) Elizabeth Richardson

   e) Elizabeth Witmer

   3. A British newspaper says the Act of Settlement, which determines who
becomes king or queen, violates the European Human Rights Convention. How?

   a) It discriminates against adopted children

   b) It discriminates against people born to unmarried parents

   c) It discriminates against Roman Catholics

   d) It discriminates against women

   e) All of the above

   4. "That's a police state, that's not Canada." Who said this?

   a) Ontario Corrections Minister Rob Sampson, who had to quit the cabinet
because Tory backbencher Doug Galt read out the names of young offenders

   b) Lawyer Clayton Ruby on the Ontario government's proposal to let police
seize a person's assets without giving notice or laying criminal charges

   c) Walkerton utilities commission foreman Frank Koebel on the notion that the
labels on water samples should indicate their true source

   d) Dr. Philip Berger of St. Michael's Hospital in Toronto commenting on the
Tories' plan to test welfare recipients for drug abuse

   e) Justice Stephen Goudge explaining why the Ontario Court of Appeal ruled
unconstitutional a part of the Criminal Code allowing police to seize documents
from lawyers' offices

   5. What has received too much of the blame for global warming, according to
Canadian scientist Jan Veizer?

   a) Volcanic activity

   b) Radiation from the sun

   c) Carbon dioxide, a greenhouse gas

   d) Chlorofluorocarbons

   e) Fly ash from garbage incinerators

   6. A Harvard Medical School study says this probably does not help very thin
women fight osteoporosis:

   a) Taking estrogen

   b) Gaining weight

   c) Having children

   d) Giving up smoking

   e) Swimming

   7. Operation Tugboat is a campaign to force pedestrians to walk in either
fast or slow parts of the sidewalk. For where is this intended?

   a) Berlin's Kurfuerstendamm

   b) Hamilton's King William Street

   c) London's Oxford Street

   d) New York's Park Avenue

   e) Toronto's Yonge Street

   8. Whom did Jean Chretien praise as a good friend to Canada and a great
statesman?

   a) U.S. President Bill Clinton

   b) Mexican President Vicente Fox

   c) Country singing star Alan Jackson

   d) Marijuana Party leader Marc-Boris St. Maurice, who ran against Bloc
Quebecois leader Gilles Duceppe in the recent federal election

   e) Pope John Paul

   9. What do French researchers say might be able to stall the advance of
Huntington's disease, a neurological disorder?

   a) Vitamin A

   b) Nerve cells from fetuses

   c) Tobacco

   d) Gene therapy

   e) Radioactive seed implants

   ANSWERS: 1c, 2d, 3e, 4b, 5c, 6a, 7c, 8a, 9b

LOAD-DATE: November 5, 2001


                              405 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Sun Media Corporation
                                The Toronto Sun

                    December 8, 2000, Friday, Final EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. 42

LENGTH: 264 words

HEADLINE: INSULIN STUDY HOPEFUL DIABETIC MICE CURED

BYLINE: SHARON LEM, TORONTO SUN

BODY:


   Edmonton researchers have discovered how to make cells in the gut produce
insulin and cure diabetes in mice.

   Insulin is normally released by beta cells in the pancreas immediately
following the eating of a meal to move sugar from the blood into the tissues
where it is needed. When there isn't enough insulin produced by beta cells, it
leads to diabetes.

   Insulin-producing pancreatic cells that are missing in diabetics are
remarkably complex and difficult to duplicate.

   A study -- published today in the journal Science -- shows how University of
Alberta researchers are able to make gastrointestinal cells of mice produce
human insulin. In effect, the technique imitates the role of the pancreas and
maintains the normal blood sugar levels in mice with diabetes.

   KIDNEY FAILURE

   "We've engineered cells in the gut to produce insulin. These endocrine cells
are able to make insulin store it before it's needed so that it's ready to be
released immediately following a meal," said researcher Dr. Timothy Kieffer.

   Type 1 diabetes leaves the pancreas unable to create insulin -- a hormone
needed to convert food sugars into physical energy. Without insulin, a body's
blood sugar level remains high and over time that can lead to kidney failure.

   What is remarkable about this work is that the production of insulin happens
at precisely the moment it's needed to manage blood sugar levels -- a hurdle
that gene-therapy researchers have been trying to solve for years.

   Still, researchers said, it could be 10 years before the technique can be
tested on humans.

LOAD-DATE: December 8, 2000


                              406 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                    December 6, 2000 Wednesday Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A03

LENGTH: 755 words

HEADLINE: The hunt for a vaccine

SOURCE: The Hamilton Spectator

BYLINE: Suzanne Morrison, Medical Research Reporter

BODY:

   A LONG ROAD - Current TB vaccines aren't effective in protecting adults
against the disease and of only limited effect for children. Dr. Zhou Xing of
McMaster says several vaccines must be developed before comparisons of their
effectiveness can even begin.

   The immune system mounts a powerful defence against tuberculosis in 90 per
cent of people infected with the disease.

   It offers protection for a lifetime.

   That kind of standoff doesn't happen in the other 10 per cent. They
eventually develop active tuberculosis because their immune system lets them
down.

   McMaster University researcher Dr. Zhou Xing wonders why. It's a question he
wrestles with all the time as he works to develop a new TB vaccine.

   His goal is to turn the declining immune systems around by developing a new
generation of anti-TB vaccines.

   "Unfortunately, we understand little about why the immune system fails to
control infection in 10 per cent while it protects 90 per cent," said Xing, head
of infectious diseases at McMaster's Centre for Gene Therapeutics and one of the
few TB vaccine researchers in Canada.

   Xing anticipates his work will one day lead to a better understanding of
immune cells and molecules involved in controlling TB, as well as better drugs
to prevent and treat it.

   His efforts recently received a significant boost with a $62,500 award from
the Sequella Global Tuberculosis Foundation, an organization created with funds
from the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation.

   The foundation's financial support is directed at jump-starting promising
research by scientists like Xing. The only anti-TB vaccine now available is BCG
(live attenuated Mycobacterium bovis BCG).

   It's the most widely used of all vaccines in the World Health Organization's
immunization program but is ineffective in protecting adults against TB and is
of limited help to children.

   "We are developing what we believe are effective and safer anti-TB vaccines,"
Xing said. "These vaccines are made by genetic engineering, (using) molecules
from the TB organism. The molecules, once they get into our immune system, will
(stimulate) our immune system to fight against TB when we are exposed."

   The National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases in the United
States estimates the development of an effective TB vaccine would save tens of
millions of lives over the next three decades.

   Xing said there's an incredible amount of work ahead for him.

   "We have to develop a number of vaccines and then compare which one might be
better before we can actually test how effective a vaccine is in a mouse model
of tuberculosis."

   TB is acquired by breathing in the bacteria. The infected person must cough
the bacteria out and another person has to inhale it directly. If the other
person has TB but isn't coughing, it's not possible to get it from them.

   "You can have dinner with them. You can hug them. You can even sleep with
them and it's not transmitted that way," said Dr. Douglas MacPherson, an
infectious disease specialist at McMaster. "It is only respiratory and they've
got to be coughing it out and you've got to be close enough to inhale it."

   Even inhaling the bacteria doesn't automatically mean infection because of
many protections such as hairs in the nose and lungs that sweep out a lot of
microscopic debris.

   "To get in, it's got to be the right size and you've got to have a fair
amount of bad luck to get it right down into your lungs," MacPherson said.

   Once in the lungs, where it may or may not create symptoms, the bacteria
usually migrates up to the top of the lung but can go anywhere else in the body
and produce TB in the brain, heart, kidneys, bones and ovaries.

   The bacteria moves with the bloodstream. It can show up as swollen lymph
nodes and through fever and weight loss. The bacterial infection is detected
with a skin test.

   While TB is a serious global concern, Canadian health officials' primary
worries focus on native Canadians and people who arrived in the 1930s and 1940s
from Britain and Europe.

   The infection has been sitting quietly in the bodies of aging seniors for
several years.

   A healthy immune system kept the disease at bay but as that system
deteriorated with age, the TB became active.

   HIV infection is the most powerful trigger of TB, but so is anything else
that severely affects the immune system such as cancer or diabetes.

   Globally, TB kills two million people a year.

   This story and related Web links can be found at www.hamiltonspectator.com.

GRAPHIC: Photo: Ted Brellisford, the Hamilton Spectator; Dr. Zhou Xing of
McMaster, one of the few TB vaccine researchers in Canada, got funding from the
Bill Gates foundation.

LOAD-DATE: November 5, 2001


                              407 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                    December 6, 2000 Wednesday Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH & SCIENCE; Pg. D04

LENGTH: 304 words

HEADLINE: Hemophilia gene-therapy trial a success

SOURCE: The Boston Globe

BYLINE: Richard Saltus

DATELINE: BOSTON

BODY:

   Researchers in a rare bit of good news for the controversial field of gene
therapy say they have used a cautious form of the treatment to reduce
spontaneous bleeding in people with hemophilia.

   The Boston scientists said they were able to treat several patients with the
inherited bleeding disease without using weakened viruses, a common strategy in
gene therapy that has brought harsh scrutiny to the field. A young volunteer
died in a gene therapy experiment using viruses in Pennsylvania last year, and
there have been several other adverse reactions to viruses.

   And, though the findings announced Monday at a San Francisco conference were
preliminary, supporters of gene therapy saw them as part of a welcome trend.
It's at least the third report in the past year of small successes with gene
therapy, which previously has disappointed despite hundreds of experiments over
the past 20 years.

   "These are the first positive results from a trial of gene therapy for
hemophilia A," which causes abnormal bleeding in about 13,500 Americans, said
Dr. David Roth of Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, the principal
investigator. The safety trial in a small number of patients is sponsored by
Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. of Cambridge.

   Gene therapy is a relatively new arm of medicine in which copies of normal
genes are used to replace or compensate for malfunctioning genes in the patient.
But, although the theory behind gene therapy is appealing, researchers have been
hard-pressed to help patients until recently.

   Last year's good news came from a team in France, which reported correcting a
severe immune defect in three out of five young children, and from Philadelphia,
where researchers saw glimpses of benefit after treating three patients with
hemophilia B, the other major type of the disease.

LOAD-DATE: November 5, 2001


                              408 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Sun Media Corporation
                                The Toronto Sun

                    December 4, 2000, Monday, Final EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS, Pg. 86, KEEPING SCORE

LENGTH: 1198 words

HEADLINE: THE LAST WORD

BYLINE: BILL LANKHOF

BODY:


   Good morning, Rob Johnson.

   Went fishing for Dolphin and all he got was the hook.

   On the plus side, the circus always is looking for good acts. Can't think of
anyone who could have a brighter future as The Amazing Human Pin Cushion ...

   BETWEEN THE SCORESHEETS: Tie Domi, a textbook example of a person who does
not actually need a stick to play hockey, scores four goals in two games.

   Garry Valk, who is such a public figure that half his family couldn't pick
him out of a police lineup, gets two goals in one game. Not to mention, Deadeye
Dave Manson this weekend got his 100th goal in the NHL.

   This might normally be a big surprise. But not this week because, let's be
honest, if Mel Lastman can score, anybody can do it.

   GENE THERAPY: Charles Oakley and Jeff McInnis got into a punchup over a
woman. You hear silly stuff like that and it makes you wonder if the good Lord
sometimes doesn't just shake his head over that whole Adam's rib experiment.

   Every week there are stories like this in the sports pages. The reason, of
course, is that the athletes are young, they have their testosterone pumping
overtime and, too often, more good looks and money than good sense.

   In other words, they have got really good genes -- except that the zipper
keeps falling down on them.

   THE DENIAL ZONE: Former Toronto Sun publisher Paul Godfrey, now president and
CEO of the Blue Jays, has denied a report in this newspaper that Rogers
Communications has contacted the Arizona Cardinals about moving the NFL
franchise to the SkyDome.

   This could be true. Or, it could be like those talks nobody at the Sun had
with nobody at the Toronto Star about the merger, sale, or whatever, of a
certain tabloid.

   Some people tried to tell us that never happen, either ...

   No. No. No. A thousand times ... ah, well, maybe.

   And we all know how that played out. Still have the poutine on our faces to
prove it.

   Pass the fork, Pierre. I think we're done.

   IT HURTS TO SAY IT, BUT: Elvis Stojko's biggest nemesis is not a Russian. Or
the Americans. It is time. At age 28 and with the Olympics still two years away,
the hourglass on his career may be running low.

   He could be the Donovan Bailey story all over at the Salt Lake City Games.
Stojko had to pull out of Skate Canada. An Achilles problem kept him out of the
Lalique Trophy and now a groin injury means he couldn't skate in the NHK
championship in Tokyo.

   Some people suggest he should forget competitive skating. Unfortunately, it
apparently is true that the hearing is the first thing to go.

   READERS' SOAPBOX: "When you ripped (Doug) Christie, it was an indication of
two things: You should have stuck to covering baseball and you obviously are
short on creativity which leads you to trash respectable athletes," Matt G. of
Vancouver e-mails. "You have a ways to go before you approach the status of
Elliott, Simmons, Daniels and Strachan."

   (Keeping Score: Yeah, but when someone spots us a K and a T, we know now how
to spell Kat. So there!)

   DARN SPELLCHECK: "There is some else out thier who see's right through you,
and your 'white-wash' world," J.B. e-mails verbatim. "Your 'white' hockey only
knowledge needs to be addressed. Learn more!. Because, you know nothing about
basketball, or any other 'cultural' sport. It's funny, you would think that the
Americians would take that sort of attitude towards such a black dominated
sport, but in fact, it is Canadian's like you. Canadians who will not say
anything worth while about basketball, because you, and they, are affriad.
Affraid that this 'black' dominated sport is acually better then hockey. Learn
to except the changing of the guards. I am Canadian, and I am white, I am also
asshamed at the lack of knowledge and comments that appear in your articles. I'm
glade that gentleman in Friday's Sun hosed you, lokks good on ya!

   (Keeping Score: Thank you. We bow to your superior knowledge and intellect.
We are but a slug upon the face of the earth, etc.)

NOTES:
Domi, Valk and Lastman proving anyone can score ... Godfrey's denials
adefinitive maybe? ... Time to retire, Elvis. Can you hear us?

LOAD-DATE: December 4, 2000


                              410 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Sun Media Corporation
                                The Toronto Sun

                    November 26, 2000, Sunday, Final EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. 32

LENGTH: 425 words

HEADLINE: CURING DIABETES GENE THERAPY PROMISING

BYLINE: SHARON LEM, TORONTO SUN

BODY:


   A promising gene therapy that has cured diabetes in lab rodents could end the
need for insulin injections in humans.

   Researchers at the University of Calgary and Yonsei University Medical School
in Seoul, South Korea, have created a synthetic gene that helps produce an
insulin substitute.

   The breakthrough is the first gene therapy experiment in the world to bring
about the remission of Type 1, insulin dependent diabetes.

   Dr. Ji-Won Yoon, of the Julia McFarlane Chair in Diabetes Research at the
University of Calgary, and his colleague, Dr. Hyun Chul Lee, of South Korea,
found that by injecting a specialized gene into diabetic rats and mice, the
scientists were able to control blood glucose levels.

   FINDINGS PUBLISHED

   The findings were published last week in Nature.

   "After 25 years of trying to find causes and cures for diabetes, this
discovery is one of the high points of my scientific career," Yoon said. "We
expect this breakthrough to pave the way for us to develop a future therapy
which, we hope, will cure diabetes in people."

   "We're very encouraged by the results. With any new research we understand at
this point in time it's not a cure, but we're hopeful for the future this could
be applied to humans," said Dr. Joi Abbott, executive director of the Alberta
and North West Territories branch of the Canadian Diabetes Association.

   Type 1 diabetes leaves the pancreas unable to create insulin -- a hormone
needed to convert food sugars into physical energy.

   Without insulin, a body's blood sugar level remains high and over time that
can lead to kidney failure.

   The researchers have engineered a virus to transport the gene into the liver
of diabetic rodents.

   This gene contains a glucose regulator -- when the glucose level in the blood
rises, the gene is activated and releases a synthetic version of insulin that
controls blood glucose.

   'DESIGNER GENE'

   "By injecting this designer gene into the liver, it creates a pancreas that
is not subjected to the destruction diabetes causes," said Dr. David Lau, of the
Julia MacFarlane Centre.

   When treated with this compound, the mice were free of diabetes for five
months and the rats went into remission for eight months, which is equal to 20
to 30 years of human life.

   But Lau warned a few hurdles remain.

   "The synthesized gene was transported into the rodents through a virus, but
it's not known if that virus will be harmless in humans," Lau cautioned.

   About 200,000 Canadians have Type 1 diabetes, previously known as juvenile
diabetes.

LOAD-DATE: November 27, 2000


                              412 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Sun Media Corporation
                         Edmonton Sun (Alberta, Canada)

                   November 23, 2000, Thursday, Final EDITION

SECTION: LIFESTYLE, Pg. 51

LENGTH: 319 words

HEADLINE: NEW HOPE FOR DIABETES CURE

BYLINE: HELEN BRANSWELL, THE CANADIAN PRESS

DATELINE: TORONTO

BODY:


   A team of South Korean and Canadian researchers have induced remission in
rats and mice with Type 1 or juvenile diabetes using a novel form of gene
therapy.

   While human testing could be nearly a decade off, the team believes the
therapy offers real promise as a potential cure for diabetes.

   "We expect this breakthrough to pave the way for us to develop a future
therapy which we hope will cure diabetes in people," said team member Ji-Won
Yoon, who holds a chair in diabetes research at the University of Calgary.

   But translating success in rodents into a cure for humans is not a sure
thing. More levels of testing are needed before the team can contemplate human
trials, Yoon said.

   "We have to approach the higher or larger animals, like dogs or monkeys.

   "And then if we succeed in these trials, then we may consider the approach to
humans. That's far away, anyway, from now."

   The lead author on the study is Dr. Hyun Chul Lee of Yonsei University
Medical School in Seoul, South Korea. The article is being published today in
the journal Nature.

   Type 1 or juvenile diabetes occurs when the body's immune system destroys the
beta cells in the pancreas which produce insulin.

   It is not known what triggers the attack.

   The body needs insulin to burn glucose for fuel. Trying to break down glucose
without insulin has been likened to trying to cook food without heat.

   Without insulin, glucose builds up in the blood system of people with Type 1
diabetes, leading to a variety of ailments including blindness, heart disease,
stroke and kidney disease.

   People with juvenile diabetes now must take regular insulin injections to
regulate the glucose in their systems.

   The Juvenile Diabetes Foundation of Canada estimates about 225,000 Canadians
have Type 1 diabetes.

   They also estimate that nearly half a million North Americans die from
diabetes and its complications each year.

LOAD-DATE: November 24, 2000


                              415 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                    November 23, 2000 Thursday Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH & SCIENCE; Pg. B04

LENGTH: 489 words

HEADLINE: Diabetes remission a possibility

SOURCE: The Canadian Press

BYLINE: Helen Branswell

DATELINE: TORONTO

BODY:

   A team of South Korean and Canadian researchers have induced remission in
rats and mice with Type 1 or juvenile diabetes using a novel form of gene
therapy.

   While human testing could be nearly a decade off, the team believes the
therapy offers real promise as a potential cure for diabetes.

   "We expect this breakthrough to pave the way for us to develop a future
therapy which, we hope, will cure diabetes in people," said team member Ji-Won
Yoon, who holds a chair in diabetes research at the University of Calgary.

   But translating success in rodents into a cure for humans is not a sure
thing. More levels of testing are needed before the team can contemplate human
trials, Yoon said from Calgary.

   "We have to approach the higher or larger animals, like dogs or monkeys. And
then if we succeed in these trials, then we may consider the approach to humans.
That's far away, anyway, from now."

   The lead author on the study is Dr. Hyun Chul Lee of Yonsei University
Medical School in Seoul, South Korea. The article is published today in the
journal Nature.

   Type 1 or juvenile diabetes occurs when the body's immune system destroys the
beta cells in the pancreas, which produce insulin. It is not known what triggers
the attack.

   The body needs insulin to burn glucose for fuel. Trying to break down glucose
without insulin has been likened to trying to cook food without heat.

   Without insulin, glucose builds up in the blood system of people with Type 1
diabetes, leading to a variety of ailments including blindness, heart disease,
stroke and kidney disease.

   People with juvenile diabetes now must take regular insulin injections to
regulate the glucose in their systems.

   The Juvenile Diabetes Foundation of Canada estimates about 225,000 Canadians
have Type 1 diabetes. They also estimate that nearly half a million North
Americans die from diabetes and its complications each year.

   The team created a genetically engineered virus to serve as the vehicle to
transport a gene known as SIA into the liver of the diabetic rodents. The gene
senses glucose levels and kicks in to prompt the creation of a modified insulin
that then goes into action.

   Mice and rats injected with the compound showed normal glucose levels within
a week or two of treatment, after only one injection.

   And they remained in remission months later -- five months in mice, eight in
rats -- without apparent side effects.

   The modified liver cells which took over insulin production were not
vulnerable to the autoimmune attack that killed off the beta cells in the first
place, meaning that one treatment theoretically would put a Type 1 diabetic into
life-long remission.

   "This gene goes into the host DNA. They act like their own gene ... (working)
properly and more smoothly and without any interruptions," Yoon said.

   An accompanying commentary warned that success in rodents may not translate
into a human therapy.

LOAD-DATE: November 5, 2001


                              419 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                     October 31, 2000 Tuesday Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH & SCIENCE; Pg. D04

LENGTH: 453 words

HEADLINE: Briefly

SOURCE: The Hamilton Spectator

BODY:

   Therapy aims to stop strokes

   Researchers in Iowa are working on a gene therapy solution for a surgical
problem that kills perhaps 25,000 Americans each year.

   The problem is cerebral vasospasm, a sudden and deadly tightening of arteries
in the brain that too often occurs after surgery for what is called a
subarachnoid stroke, says Dr. Donald Heistad, cardiology professor at University
of Iowa College of Medicine.

   Each year about 100,000 Americans experience such hemorrhages, in which a
blood vessel bursts in the brain.

   Stress fractures moving up

   Stress fractures are not just for runners any more.

   The stress fracture, an overuse injury that occurs when a bone succumbs to a
series of micro-fractures, has long been associated with the lower body and
linked to running sports like track, cross-country, and soccer.

   But an Ohio State University physician noticed that many athletes were
getting stress fractures in the upper body. "The traditional place for stress
fractures is the foot, the knee, maybe the hip," says Dr. Chris Kaeding, medical
director of OSU Sports Medicine Center. "But we started to see more and more
stress fractures of the upper body and what was interesting is that when we
tried to classify them, certain patterns occurred."

   Gymnasts and cheerleaders got stress fractures below the elbow. Golfers got
them in the lower ribs.

   When smoke gets in your eyes

   Smoke can affect more than your vision when it gets in your eyes.

   Adding to the list of ills linked to passive smoke, researchers now say that
middle-age men who are heavily exposed to secondhand smoke have nearly twice the
risk of impotence as those who breathe clean air.

   "Tell a guy that if he hangs out in smoky bars, whether he smokes or not,
it's going to affect him," says Dr. Norman Edelman, a New York state
pulmonologist and consultant to the American Lung Association.

   Predictably, the news is even worse for the smokers themselves --
particularly cigar smokers.

   It's a SAD time for many

   Most of us welcomed the weekend's change of the clocks because it meant we
gained an extra hour of sleep.

   But for those who suffer from seasonal affective disorder (SAD), it can
herald the start of the most difficult time of year. Millions of Americans
experience depression and other symptoms as the days grow shorter. Most
difficult months for people with SAD, a mood disorder linked to seasonal light
variations, are January and February. It subsides during summer months.

   "It's related somehow to the fact the days are shorter and there's less
sunlight, and the intensity of the sunlight is less," says Jeremy Kisch of the
National Mental Health Association.

   --Spectator news services

LOAD-DATE: November 5, 2001


                              420 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                     October 30, 2000 Monday Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A12

LENGTH: 312 words

HEADLINE: McMaster to get $21m for research

SOURCE: The Hamilton Spectator

BYLINE: John Mentek

BODY:

   McMaster University will get more than $21 million from the province to spend
on research projects.

   Energy, Science and Technology minister Jim Wilson is to announce the grants
today at Mac, where he'll tour the Applied Dynamics Laboratory.

   The money is from three grant programs: $1.1 million from the Premier's
Research Excellence Awards; $3 million from the Ontario Research and Development
Challenge Fund; and more than $17 million from the Ontario Innovation Trust.

   Eleven Mac researchers will get $100,000 each for original new research in
areas such as physics, biochemistry, medicine and math from the Premier's
Research Excellence Awards. Mac also plans to give each of the young researchers
$50,000 extra.

   The Ontario Research and Development Challenge Fund will hand over $3 million
to the civil engineering department for original research in masonry, earthquake
engineering, new and underused materials and infrastructure renewal.

   The grant will also help fund a new design centre in the Applied Dynamics
Laboratory, to be called the Centre for Masonry, Effective Design and
Remediation of Structure.

   The bulk of the money, roughly $17 million, will be spent on six new projects
in areas like molecular medicine, communications technology research and a
multi-media server for the humanities department. Some money will also be put
toward infrastructure improvements and new equipment.

   The provincial dollars are on top of $17.8 million the university received
from Ottawa this summer, half of which will be spent on a centre for
cutting-edge research in gene therapy.

   That funding came from the Canada Foundation for Innovation, to build and
equip a Centre for Molecular Medicine and Health, and for research projects in
areas like biomolecular science, information technology and communications.

LOAD-DATE: November 5, 2001


                              421 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                     October 30, 2000 Monday Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH & SCIENCE; Pg. C04

LENGTH: 656 words

HEADLINE: Briefly

SOURCE: The Hamilton Spectator

BODY:

   Vitamin E helps prevent stroke

   Researchers in Texas say vitamin E may prevent heart attacks and stroke
despite studies to the contrary.

   Taking the antioxidant helps reduce inflammation that causes heart and vessel
disease, and thus cuts the risk of heart attacks and stroke, they say.

   The researchers gave volunteers -- some with diabetes and heart disease --
daily doses of 1,200 international units of natural vitamin E, known as
alpha-tocopherol, for three months. They then checked the amount of a specific
protein in the blood -- C-reactive protein, or CRP -- that indicates
inflammation. The vitamin E had reduced the presence of CRP by up to 30 per
cent.

   Gene therapy for Parkinson's

   Researchers say gene therapy for Parkinson's disease has produced promising
results in animal studies with just one more hurdle remaining before an
application for human trials.

   Scientists at the Research Center for Brain Repair at Rush Presbyterian-St.
Luke's Medical Center in Chicago report in the journal Science that the
treatment uses a harmless virus to deliver a nerve-preserving molecule to brain
cells whose gradual destruction causes the trembling, stiffness, weakness and
other symptoms of Parkinson's disease.

   The molecule has a cumbersome name, glial-derived neurotrophic factor, GNDF.
It not only strengthens and protects the brain cells that die in the progression
of Parkinson's disease but also increases production of dopamine, a
neurotransmitter that sends cell-to-cell brain signals that allow people to move
normally. Loss of dopamine in the brain causes the symptoms of Parkinson's
disease.

   Folic acid and colon cancer

   Folic acid is the B vitamin known to prevent neurological problems in fetuses
and now may possibly help to fight colon cancer.

   But just what dose would be the right amount continues to puzzle scientists.
"Clearly, taking 400 micrograms a day, which is more than most Americans take
daily, seems to convey more protection," says Dr. Joel Mason, a researcher at
the Human Nutrition Research Centre on Aging at Tufts University. "We have 20
large epidemiologic studies, which included tens of thousands of people, that
tell us this. But epidemiologic studies can only establish an association, not a
cause-and-effect relationship."

   "We also have animal studies that show that varying the amount of folate in
the diet can modulate the development of colon cancer."

   Diabetics missing treatment

   A new study says Americans with diabetes aren't receiving preventive
treatments as often or as thoroughly as they should.

   Despite a variety of outreach efforts, preventive care for adults with
non-insulin dependent diabetes (Type II) differs vastly depending on factors
like age, race and income, according to the government scientists who prepared
the report. The findings, which are intended to be a benchmark for education
efforts in the coming decade, show that "it's pretty clear there's plenty of
room for improvement," says Edward Tierney, an epidemiologist at the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta and a co-author of the study.

   Doctors OK with executions

   Doctors may take an oath to do no harm but at least some of them apparently
think it's OK to participate in death-penalty executions.

   The American Medical Association and the American College of Physicians, both
professional associations for doctors, have guidelines barring their members
from participating in eight of the procedures, or steps, involved in a lethal
injection. These procedures range from giving the lethal injection or starting
intravenous lines to consulting with supervisory people or declaring the person
dead. But 80 per cent of the doctors who responded to a recent survey say they
believe it's all right to participate in at least one of the eight procedures in
question, and 53 per cent say it would be OK to take part in five or more.

   Spectator news services

LOAD-DATE: November 5, 2001


                              428 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Sun Media Corporation
                         Edmonton Sun (Alberta, Canada)

                   October 11, 2000, Wednesday, Final EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. 7, THE INSIDE STORY

LENGTH: 731 words

HEADLINE: TINY WORMS COULD ANSWER SOME HUGE QUESTIONS

BYLINE: DOUG BEAZLEY, EDMONTON SUN

BODY:


   The first thing you ought to know about C. elegans is this: give or take
about 50,000 genes, it's not a whole lot different from you.

   It's got a digestive tract, reproductive organs, skin. It's also about a
millimetre long, transparent, lives in topsoil and eats bacteria. But you get
the idea.

   C. elegans is a very humble worm, even by worm standards. When it's not
minding its own business, it's giving up the deepest secrets of life to
molecular biologists like Alberta's own Dr. Jim McGhee and Dr. Paul Mains.

   Someday, maybe work on C. elegans will point the way to new gene therapies
that save human lives. Or maybe not. McGhee doesn't much care; he's only in it
for the worms.

   "I used to work on chickens," said the former Ontario gene researcher, now
with the University of Calgary. "I switched to worms in 1983. Chickens have to
be dead before you can study them, and I like working with the living.

   "They're delightful little animals. They have about 1,000 cells each. The
embryo develops in just 12 to 14 hours, so you can watch them develop under the
microscope. Fascinating."

   "They don't have a whole lot of personality," admitted Jay Kormish, a St.
Paul graduate student who left the U of A last year to start her doctorate work
on McGhee's tiny worms.

   "But they're the perfect genetic research tool because they're so much easier
to study than humans. And you can often find an analogue for human genes in the
worm's genes."

   In other words, there's a little C. elegans in all of us - and that could be
very good news someday for people suffering from cancer and metabolic diseases.
Two years ago, the worm became the first multi-cell animal to have its gene
sequence charted by scientists.

   Sequencing the worm's genetic blueprint made it ideal for basic research:
right now there are about 2,000 scientists around the world studying various
aspects of C. elegans. The researchers heading up the multi-million-dollar
federal Human Genome Project in the U.S. got their start in worms.

   Mains' research at the U of C is largely about cell differentiation - how a
clot of identical embryo cells eventually turns into a complex living organism
like a worm, or a person. In C. elegans, a special set of genes tells the embryo
cells to form a worm's shape - basically a tube.

   The process is a lot like the one that allows cancer cells to change shape
and spread through the body. If scientists can figure out how C. elegans becomes
a worm-shaped worm, they might learn how to control cancer cell growth in human
beings without the side effects of drugs.

   That happy day is still way, way down the road. Right now, Mains is just
working on worms.

   "When we started doing this we really had no idea where we were going," he
said. "Most critical discoveries in science happen that way.

   "This isn't just one gene at work, but dozens of genes interacting. We have
to understand how all of them work before we can apply it to other living
things."

   McGhee's spent much of the last 17 years trying to fathom how the worm's
digestive tract works. Right now he and his team are waiting on genetic
screening data for what he calls "gut defects" in worms that might - if they're
lucky - open new areas of research in human gastrointestinal disease.

   "The whole field of molecular genetics recognizes the unity of life, worms
and humans included," he said. "We expect to turn up a dozen or so gut defect
genes. Whether they correspond to human genes ... we're working on it."

   Both Mains' and McGhee's projects are what's known as "hard research" -
science done for its own sake. But it's also funded by the provincial
government's Heritage Foundation for Medical Research. So it has to hint at
eventual medical applications, even if they're decades away.

   "We're putting together a kind of summary right now for the funding bodies,
of the relation between worm genes and those in other organisms. Including
humans," said Kormish.

   In science, the practical applications often show up long after the research
has been done: when Newton developed calculus, nobody knew we'd be using it to
go to the moon centuries later. And if C. elegans doesn't provide a magical
medical bullet in McGhee's lifetime, he won't mind.

   "It's about finding out something fundamental about how the world works," he
said. "And that's fun. I wouldn't be doing it otherwise."

NOTES:
Comments? Write me at dbeazley@edm.sunpub.com

GRAPHIC: photo C. elegans could hold some clues to curing diseases.

LOAD-DATE: October 11, 2000


                              430 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Sun Media Corporation
                         Edmonton Sun (Alberta, Canada)

                     October 2, 2000, Monday, Final EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. 5

LENGTH: 249 words

HEADLINE: FAMILY URGES DONATIONS

BYLINE: KEVIN MASTERMAN, SUN MEDIA

DATELINE: TORONTO

BODY:


   The family of Pierre Trudeau has asked Canadians to remember the late prime
minister by donating to foundations supporting research into Parkinson's disease
and cancer.

   Trudeau, 80, died of prostate cancer Thursday. He was also afflicted with
Parkinson's.

   Mary Jardine, national director of the Parkinson Foundation of Canada, said
the gift of the Trudeau family during this tragic time was thoughtful in that it
brings awareness to the cause.

   "This insidious, cruel disease robs people of the potential to live out their
life with the vitality and intellect they possess. Trudeau personifies all
that," said Jardine.

   She said research is seeing breakthroughs all the time in gene therapy, new
surgery and drugs.

   "The cure is going to happen. It's just wonderful to be a part of that," she
said.

   The neurological disorder, which generally strikes those over 50, exhibits
itself through limited movement, muscle stiffness and tremors.

   "It would have been devastating to a man of (Trudeau's) physical stamina and
intellectual capacity," said Jardine.

   The Parkinson Foundation of Canada sponsors awareness programs, conferences
and support groups for people with Parkinson's, and their families.

   "We try to enhance their lives," said Jardine.

   "It's not just for those with Parkinson's but their loved ones as well. It's
awful to watch a family member deteriorate with the disease."

   Donations can be made to the Parkinson Foundation and the Canadian Cancer
Society.

LOAD-DATE: October 2, 2000


                              431 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Sun Media Corporation
                                The Toronto Sun

                     October 2, 2000, Monday, Final EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. 4

LENGTH: 190 words

HEADLINE: A CALL FOR DISEASE RESEARCH SUPPORT

BYLINE: KEVIN MASTERMAN, TORONTO SUN

BODY:


   The family of Pierre Trudeau has asked Canadians to remember the late prime
minister by donating to foundations supporting research into Parkinson's disease
and cancer.

   Trudeau, 80, died of prostate cancer Thursday. He was also afflicted with
Parkinson's.

   Mary Jardine, national director of the Parkinson Foundation of Canada, said
the gift of the Trudeau family during this tragic time was thoughtful in that it
brings awareness to the cause.

   "This insidious, cruel disease robs people of the potential to live out their
life with the vitality and intellect they possess. Trudeau personifies all
that," Jardine said.

   BRAIN DISORDER

   She said research is seeing breakthroughs all the time in gene therapy and
drugs.

   The neurological disorder, which generally strikes those over 50, exhibits
itself through limited movement, muscle stiffness and tremors.

   The Parkinson Foundation sponsors awareness programs, conferences and support
groups.

   Donations can be made to the Parkinson Foundation by calling 1-800-565-3000
or 416-227-9700. Donations can be made to the The Canadian Cancer Society by
calling 416-488-5400.

LOAD-DATE: October 3, 2000


                              433 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                    September 15, 2000 Friday Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH & SCIENCE; Pg. C06

LENGTH: 540 words

HEADLINE: Stars urge research funding; Actors Fox and Moore want federal money
for stem cell research which they say could lead to cure for diseases.

SOURCE: Cox News Service

BYLINE: Megan K. Doyle

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   Actors Michael J. Fox and Mary Tyler Moore urged a Senate panel yesterday to
support federal spending for stem cell research.

   "The consistent and inescapable conclusion is that this research offers the
potential to eliminate diseases," said Fox, who suffers from Parkinson's disease
and left his starring role in the television series "Spin City" this year to
establish a foundation for Parkinson's research.

   Stem cell research involves the use of embryonic stem cells, which are
derived from human embryos and can develop into most of the body's specialized
tissues, including muscle cells, nerve cells, liver cells and blood cells.

   The cells' ability to divide for indefinite periods make them ideal for
research and possible treatments of spinal cord injuries and diseases such as
Parkinson's, diabetes, heart disease, and multiple sclerosis, according to the
National Institutes of Health.

   Current law prohibits federal money from being used for research that would
destroy human embryos, but does not directly refer to stem cell research. A bill
proposed by Senator Arlen Specter, chairman of the Senate Appropriations
subcommittee for labour, health and human services and education, would allow
federal money to be used for stem cell research.

   Opponents of stem cell research warned that the legislation could result in
human embryos being created and sold specifically for such research.

   "All of this cheapens human life and our respect for it," said Russell
Saltzman, a Lutheran pastor from Kansas City, Mo.

   Ron Heagy, a quadriplegic victim of a surfing accident and founder of the
Life is an Attitude Foundation, also testified against the use of stem cells
from human embryos on moral and ethical grounds.

   Fox, Moore and other supporters of the research cited guidelines issued by
the National Institutes of Health on Aug. 23 as an acceptable method of
ethically regulating stem cell research.

   "While I do understand that some people have heartfelt concerns about this
research, ... stem cell research should be pursued vigorously and is appropriate
for federal funding," said Moore, who suffers from diabetes and is international
chairman of the Juvenile Diabetes Foundation.

   Actress Gina Gershon, who appeared in the movie The Insider, testified on
behalf of her friend, Jennifer Estess, who suffers from Amyotrophic Lateral
Sclerosis (ALS), also known as Lou Gehrig's Disease.

   "ALS breaks down the body ... until a person can no longer breathe," said
Gershon. "Stem cell research could reverse that process. To not find out seems
like an agonizingly cruel decision."

   Experts in cell biology, cancer research and gene therapy also testified,
stating that embryos would not be created for stem cell research, in accordance
with the National Institutes of Health guidelines.

   "Cells used for research must be derived solely from embryos generated for
fertility treatments and in excess of clinical need. Such embryos would
otherwise be discarded," said Dr. Richard O. Hynes, president of the American
Society for Cell Biology.

   "I see in these cells a chance for a medical miracle," said Fox.

   "The government has done its work. Now we ask you to release our tax dollars
so the scientists can do their work."

GRAPHIC: Photo: Kamenko Pajic, the Associated Press; Michael J. Fox listens as
Mary Tyler Moore testifies at a Washington hearing yesterday on funding for
research.

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2002


                              437 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                     August 29, 2000 Tuesday Final Edition

SECTION: CANADA & WORLD; Pg. D01

LENGTH: 177 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy may grow heart cells

SOURCE: The Washington Post

BYLINE: Rick Weiss

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   Doctors who injected new genes into the hearts of heart-attack survivors said
yesterday their experimental technique had rejuvenated damaged cardiac cells,
increased blood flow to the heart and reduced the frequency of chest pains.

   The researchers used a gene called VEGF, part of the body's inborn system for
growing new blood vessels. Scientists have theorized that the gene might
initiate the growth of new coronary vessels that bring oxygen to the heart.

   "There has been great concern about whether gene therapy works," said Jeffrey
M. Isner of the Tufts University School of Medicine in a statement.

   Isner led a study published in the September issue of the American Heart
Association journal Circulation. "This is very solid evidence that it does."

   Other experts, however, said the study offered more promise than proof. And
the new report does not mention that all four of Isner's more recent studies of
vessel growth genes were shut down by the Food and Drug Administration in March
because of concerns about the quality of his research.

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2002


                              441 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Sun Media Corporation
                                The Toronto Sun

                     August 20, 2000, Sunday, Final EDITION

SECTION: COMMENT, Pg. C12, IN BRIEF

LENGTH: 526 words

HEADLINE: TROLLOPE'S CHARACTERS JUMP OFF THE PAGE

BYLINE: YVONNE CRITTENDEN

BODY:


   MARRYING THE MISTRESS

   By Joanna Trollope

   Like her famous forebear, English novelist Joanna Trollope creates fictional
characters who jump off the page.

   Her new novel is about marital dissatisfaction, infidelity, emotional
manipulation and the strengths and weaknesses that bedevil most families.

   Guy Stockdale is a London judge married for 40 years to a woman who has
become unhealthily dependent on him for all her emotional and practical needs.
Guy has had a much younger lover for a number of years and finally decides to
grab at happiness while he still can, leave his wife and marry his mistress.

   Once the decision is announced, both he and his mistress realize that no
matter how personally happy they are, their actions will have significant and
unexpected impact on Guy's family, not just his aggrieved wife, but on his
children and grandchildren as well.

   Treading this emotional minefield, Trollope manages to convey all the
competing points of view with empathy and insight in a deliciously readable
story. (McArthur & Co.)

   THE DEVIL'S CURE

   By Kenneth Opel

   Canadian writer Kenneth Opel has written a first-class thriller in this story
about cults, murder, gene therapy and the search for a cancer cure.

   Dr. Laura Donaldson is a researcher on the brink of an important gene therapy
breakthrough. She has a sister who is desperately ill with cancer which adds to
the pressure she feels in her work. Then a serial killer on Death Row, David
Haines, is found to have an immune system which is miraculously curing his
cancer. Donaldson wants his blood, but he refuses because he is a religious
fanatic who hates doctors.

   FBI agent Kevin Sheldrake is called in when Haines makes a daring escape and
he and the doctor undertake a desperate race against time to catch Haines before
he kills again, and before he is hunted down by other law enforcement and killed
before his potentially life-giving blood can be tested.

   It's one of those books that is hard to put down. (HarperCollins)

   THE GREAT DIVIDE

   By T. Davis Bunn

   In the tradition of Scott Turow and John Grisham, this readable novel by T.
Davis Bunn has a lowly lawyer battling against powerful corporate interests to
protect the rights of the innocent.

   Marcus Glenwood was once a successful attorney in a prestigious law firm.
After a car accident, for which he is partly to blame, kills his two children,
Marcus is holed up in Rocky Mount, N.C., his home town, unsure whether he can
rebuild his life.

   A young, black woman called Gloria Hall, a human rights activist on a
self-appointed mission to China to investigate the labour practices of a
worldwide sports fashion company headquartered in Rocky Mount, goes missing and
her desperate parents believe she has been kidnapped, or worse, by the Chinese
government. Marcus reluctantly decides to take the case, which looks impossible
to win, and finds himself embroiled in a dangerous web of international greed,
deceit and double-dealing.

   Bunn, a one-time international financier turned best-selling author, proves
himself a worthy practioner of the popular genre of legal thrillers. (Doubleday)

LOAD-DATE: August 24, 2000


                              442 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                     August 17, 2000 Thursday Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 539 words

HEADLINE: McMaster scientists thrilled by $10m

SOURCE: The Hamilton Spectator

BYLINE: Joanna Frketich; Health Reporter

BODY:

   McMaster University researchers received nearly $10 million for health
studies in one of the largest federal grants awarded yesterday in Ontario.

   Hamilton was second only to the University of Toronto, which received nearly
$14 million, when the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) announced
the first winners of its highly-competitive grants.

   "It's extremely important in the recognition it brings to McMaster," said Dr.
Stephanie Atkinson, member of the CIHR's governing council and a professor of
pediatrics at the university.

   "The awards reflect the excellence of research at McMaster."

   Health Minister Allan Rock handed out $194 million, spread over five years,
to universities and hospitals across the country on behalf of CIHR, Canada's new
funding agency for health research.

   The grants will pay for the work of 647 Canadian scientists including 20
projects in Hamilton.

   Ontario's share was more than $75 million for 18 centres. The top five grants
in the province went to the University of Toronto, McMaster, Queen's University,
the Hospital for Sick Children and Toronto's University Health Network made up
of Toronto General, Toronto Western and Princess Margaret hospitals.

   "I'm thrilled to bits," said Dr. Jonathan Bramson, assistant professor of
pathology and molecular medicine at McMaster.

   "There really is no other source of funding."

   Bramson will use the $270,000 grant he will receive over the next three years
studying viruses and gene therapy to try to create better vaccines and possibly
cures for diseases such as cancer, hepatitis C and muscular dystrophy.

   His study was among the top 30 per cent of applicants in the country with
high enough rankings to receive funding.

   The institute currently gets so many requests during its two competitions a
year that it can only give grants to about one-third of them. The result is a
rigorous competition in which only the best designed and most needed studies get
money.

   "Those that get funded are good calibre," said Bramson. "But some very good
ones fall by the wayside."

   Dr. Saroj Saigal, professor of pediatrics at McMaster, and her research team
made the cut with $500,000 over three years to complete a study started 23 years
ago on extremely low birthweight babies.

   "It's an opportunity we didn't want to miss," she said. "This information is
not available and not easy to get."

   The research is the final piece of a study comparing 150 premature babies
weighing less than two pounds born between 1977 and 1982 and 125 children
carried to term.

   Her checks on the children at ages three, five, eight and 16 have already
revealed that one-third of the preemies have disabilities such as cerebral
palsy, blindness or hearing problems. Half of them have trouble learning or fail
a grade at school.

   Saigal wants to check on the children as young adults to find out how they
are managing with living on their own, careers and post-secondary education.

   "We want to help provide current parents with long term outcomes so they can
make fully informed decisions ... and know what to expect," said Saigal. "The
study is extremely expensive, time consuming and demanding...so we were
obviously very delighted."

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2002


                              445 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Sun Media Corporation
                                The Toronto Sun

                      July 30, 2000, Sunday, Final EDITION

SECTION: LIFESTYLE, Pg. 42

LENGTH: 1630 words

HEADLINE: LIVING IN THE SHADOW OF ASTHMA THE IGNORANCE ABOUT ASTHMA ON THE PART
OF PATIENTS AND DOCTORS MAY BEPARTICULARLY LETHAL IF YOU HAPPEN TO LIVE IN
TORONTO

BYLINE: SUZANNE KING, SPECIAL TO THE SUN

BODY:


   At first it's a little wheeze, no big deal.

   Michelle Thomas wheezes a lot, and with a puff of her inhaler, it passes. But
once every couple of months, usually because of a cold or flu, the wheeze gets
louder and deeper until Thomas can "hear it inside." Her airways clog with
mucus, tighten, and her chest seizes up. It becomes almost impossible to
breathe.

   "I feel hopeless because I can't really do anything when I'm like that. I
just sit there and try to help myself, but it doesn't really work unless I get
the right medication that I need," says the 14-year-old.

   Even when she reaches the emergency room, and they give her a mixture of
oxygen and Ventolin vapour, it can take up to half an hour before Thomas can
breathe again, and often another week in hospital before she can function
without an oxygen mask.

   TERRIFYING SCENE

   It's a terrifying scene for an adult to go through, let alone a young girl,
but it's being played out time and again all over the country.

   Two million Canadians have asthma, and last year alone, at a cost of $ 600
million, over half of them ended up in emergency rooms, hospital beds or
received some other kind of urgent asthma care. Of these patients, approximately
500 adults and 20 children didn't make it -- 10 people a week die from asthma.

   These numbers become downright startling when you consider that eight of
those 10 die needlessly, according to a survey recently released by Glaxo
Wellcome Inc., a research-based pharmaceutical company.

   What's going wrong? According to the national standards set out in the
Canadian Asthma Consensus Guidelines, the majority of people with asthma should
barely be affected by symptoms.

   There should be no late-night emergency room visits, hospital stays or
unscheduled doctors' appointments. Coughing, wheezing and breathlessness should
be a problem less than three days per week, and require only the recommended
weekly dosage of emergency "rescue" medications.

   Asthma should never disrupt sleep, stop someone from going to work, school or
social functions, or from maintaining normal physical activity.

   Dr. Mark Greenwald, vice-president of the Asthma Society of Canada, takes it
even a step further. He sees no reason why most asthmatics can't be Olympic
athletes. In fact, he estimates that almost a quarter of the Olympic team do
have asthma, including long-distance speed skater Susan Auck.

   And he adds that although they don't advertise it, many professional hockey
players also deal with the disease.

   He feels the guidelines are completely realistic. Yet the survey, Asthma in
Canada, in which 1,001 adults or parents of children were interviewed by The
Angus Reid Group, revealed that 57% of people with asthma aren't living up to
them.

   "We don't think of asthma as a chronic disease. We treat it from crisis to
crisis," says Greenwald. "Asthma's not sexy. You cough and you lose your breath.
So what? But when you get to the emergency room and you can't breathe and you're
about to die, that's pretty impressive. And that gets attention."

   Greenwald says the approach and treatment in the emergency room is the exact
opposite of crucial long-term treatment, but because it's such a quick fix,
people tend to rely on fast-acting "rescue" medication like Ventolin rather than
targeting the real cause of asthma -- inflammation of the airways. And unless
that's addressed, it will leave permanent scarring, and cause rapid lung
deterioration at age 50 or 60.

   But many people avoid long-term treatment because it is a lot more tedious.
It involves eliminating anything that might trigger asthma -- removing
wall-to-wall carpeting from the living room because it's a mating ground for
dust mites, giving up smoking or even giving away the family pet. It's also
important to take a daily regimen of preventative "controller" drugs like
corticosteroids, which reduce inflammation, and to do this properly.

   But this seems to be another downfall when it comes to controlling asthma.
The Asthma in Canada survey noted a high level of confusion about what drugs to
use, when, why and how. Almost half of the people with poorly controlled asthma,
for example, don't understand the role corticosteroids play in reducing airway
inflammation. What's more, they use it when they're having an asthma attack
instead of their rescue medication.

   UNDERESTIMATE CONDITION

   It also showed that many people have underestimated just how severe their
condition is, and that doctors have failed to educate them. While 98% of
physicians feel serious asthma symptoms can usually be prevented, only 76% of
their patients do. And in spite of the low success rate in dealing with asthma,
eight out of 10 general practitioners feel their patients' disease is properly
controlled. Nine out of 10 respirologists, specialists in the area, feel the
same way. They obviously aren't following the Canadian Asthma Consensus
Guidelines, even though most claim they've read them. But when they were asked
to talk about them, only a few could name more than a couple of criteria.

   This ignorance about asthma on the part of patients and doctors may be
particularly lethal if you happen to live in Toronto. The Board of Health
estimates there are up to 1,000 premature smog-related deaths in Toronto each
year. This summer has had the earliest smog alert on record and according to
Rich Whate of the Toronto Environmental Alliance, will be more deadly than ever.
Smog, ground-level ozone, affects all of us, but it's particularly dangerous for
children, seniors, pregnant women and people with respiratory illness like
asthma.

   "The effects aren't subtle," says Whate. "The effects are direct and we're
seeing people go into emergency wards with respiratory problems, and we're
seeing people not able to function as they normally can because of our dirty
air."

   What's an asthmatic to do? Greenwald recommends that people take their health
into their own hands. Discuss the Canadian Asthma Consensus Guidelines with your
doctor, and ensure you're doing everything you can to meet the criteria. Make
sure you know about your medication, including how to take it. Understand that
in most cases, if you end up in the emergency room or are admitted to hospital,
it is a failure in treatment, and look for alternatives.

   Most doctors, says Greenwald, won't invest the necessary time needed to
properly keep tabs on their asthma patients because they can no longer bill the
government for a counselling or educational session. He suggests people call the
Asthma Society of Canada's InfoLine at 1-800-787-3880 or visit its Web site at
www.asthma.ca. The Lung Association also has an Asthma Action Helpline,
1-800-668-7682.

   Chris Haromy, a certified asthma educator and respiratory therapist, answers
calls at the Asthma Society. He also suffers from asthma, and agrees that an
occasional visit to the doctor isn't enough.

   "There are a lot of different things you have to go over before it can be
managed properly. Almost always there's a need for good, repeated education. Not
just the one-time thing, not just 10 minutes or an hour here or there," says
Haromy.

   As for Michelle Thomas, she's one of the few people doing everything right,
but still suffering from severe asthma.

   She has an elevator pass at school because she can't climb a lot of stairs,
she often sits out in gym because she gets too breathless, or just misses school
altogether.

   And she has to contend with an arsenal of medication -- Singulair leukotriene
antagonist pills once a day, a corticosteroid inhaler complete with air chamber
morning and evening, and relief tablets, crushed and inhaled at least three or
four times a week.

   Greenwald, who treats her, says she'll probably always have severe asthma.
But Thomas is a fighter. In spite of her symptoms, she holds down a part-time
job and maintains an 80% average at a fine arts school, where she blows through
her inflamed airways on a clarinet. She may beat this disease yet.

   TRIGGERS

   The Lung Association of Canada calls asthma an inflammatory lung disease in
which the airways tighten and mucus accumulates, causing wheezing, coughing and
shortness of breath.

   Ten people die from asthma each week. Eight of these deaths could be avoided
with proper medication, and by staying away from stimuli which might bring on an
attack. Look for these common triggers:

   - pet/animal dander (e.g., flakes of fur, skin, feathers)

   - cigarette smoke

   - dust mites

   - pollen

   - cold air

   - exercise

   - changes in weather and temperature

   - respiratory infections and colds

   - scented products

   For more information, call the Lung Association's Asthma Action Helpline at
1-800-668-7682, the Asthma Society of Canada's InfoLine at 1-800-787-3880 or its
Web site at www.asthma.ca.

   RELIEF

   With the proper medication, 90% of asthmatics can live symptom-free. There
are two main categories of medication needed: "Relievers," also called
bronchodilators, are used to relax airway muscles during an asthma attack.
"Controllers," such as corticosteroids and leukotriene antagonists, are taken on
a regular basis to prevent asthma symptoms altogether. They correct the cause of
asthma, inflammation of the airways.

   Research into new drugs which short-circuit the immune system is under way,
and the first of these, an antibody called anti-IgE, could be available in the
U.S. as early as next year. But Dr. Mark Greenwald, vice-president of the Asthma
Society of Canada, is skeptical. He believes gene therapy is still very
theoretical and won't be an effective asthma treatment for years to come.

   For now, make sure you know exactly how to take your medication, whether it's
by an inhaler with a spacer, a Diskhaler, a Turbuhaler or in tablet form.

GRAPHIC: 2 photos Mike Cassese 1. DOCTOR TALK ... Dr. Mark Greenwald sees no
reason why most asthmatics can't be Olympic athletes.  2. FIGHTING SPIRIT ...
Asthma sufferer Michelle Thomas holds down an 80% average at a fine arts school.

LOAD-DATE: July 31, 2000


                              446 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                      July 27, 2000 Thursday Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 837 words

HEADLINE: Mac gets millions for gene therapy; Part of $17.8m in research funds

SOURCE: The Hamilton Spectator

BYLINE: Christine Cox

BODY:

   McMaster University is getting $17.8 million in federal funding.

   More than half of it is for a centre doing cutting-edge research in gene
therapy.

   The announcement came yesterday from the Canada Foundation for Innovation
(CFI), which handed out a total of $363 million to 59 universities, colleges,
hospitals, and not-for-profit research institutions across Canada.

   McMaster was awarded $9.6 million to build and equip its Centre for Molecular
Medicine and Health. McMaster president Peter George predicts the research
centre will become a world leader.

   Dr. Jack Gauldie, chairman of pathology and molecular medicine, said the work
includes looking at how gene therapy can be used to treat diseases such as
cancer.

   "Molecular investigation in medicine is a recognition that we need to move to
more basic levels to understand the problems associated with disease.

   "This is an institute that will have both basic investigation as well as
clinical investigation.

   "In true McMaster fashion, this is bench to bedside research -- laboratory to
patient research."

   McMaster will investigate a wide variety of approaches to putting new
molecular and genetic discoveries into practice to fight disease. In gene
therapy, genes are used like drugs to fire up the immune system.

   The new building, which was rejected for federal funding last year, will be
adjacent to and integrated with the health sciences centre and the life sciences
centre.

   Gauldie said the size, complexity and specifics of the structure are still to
be determined.

   "It will be a significant addition to the existing capacity for research at
McMaster."

   The Canada Foundation provides 40 per cent of the project cost. McMaster
anticipates getting a matching amount from the provincial government, through
the Ontario Innovation Trust, and the university is responsible for raising the
remaining 20 per cent.

   McMaster's second-biggest award from the CFI was $5.2 million for
biomolecular research.

   With the contributions from the province and McMaster, the total will be
almost $13 million.

   This initiative also will have a major impact on the development of new drugs
and new approaches to therapeutic intervention in diseases.

   Dr. Brian McCarry, professor of chemistry, said about a third of the money
will be used for research lab space, and two-thirds for equipment.

   "This is going to look at the interaction of proteins and DNA with small
molecules. It's a drug discovery approach."

   McCarry said it will bring chemistry and biochemistry techniques together to
solve common research problems. "(The CFI) funded us for every penny we asked
for. This is very unusual, so they clearly saw the value of this."

   McMaster will receive $2.6 million for information technology and
communications research, another university priority. The balance of the funding
is split among three smaller projects.

   George, the university president, is jubilant about the announcement. "It's a
brilliant result and we're very happy."

   McMaster is in sixth place on the CFI funding list for universities.

   "We're a much smaller institution than most of them, so in per capita terms,
adjusted by size, we have done extremely well."

   McGill University topped the list with about $61 million.

   George noted that McMaster faculty were involved in five successful joint
funding applications, including one from St. Joseph's Hospital. St. Joseph's
will get about $2.7 million to study the neurobiology of stress, mood and
anxiety disorders.

   "It's fabulous news for the community," said hospital executive
vice-president Kevin Smith.

   The money will be used to purchase a type of magnetic resonance imaging
machine. Smith said it will enable the hospital "to take a snapshot of the
brain" as it is working. "You can introduce a stimulus, a drug ... and then
watch how the brain reacts to that," he explained.

   "It's also very helpful for looking at blood flow."

   He said that some of the new research suggests that how blood is routed
through the brain may have some impact on mental illness.

   Brock University will get about $160,000, mainly for motion analysis for
movement disabilities.

   The CFI also handed out $8.5 million from its College Research Development
Fund. Sheridan College receives $599,992 for an elder research centre that will
take interdisciplinary approaches to topics including aging, social services and
gerontology, and intergenerational study. Niagara College was awarded $797,110
for its industrial solutions research unit.

   Top 10 recipients

   1) McGill University $61,038,702

   2) University of British Columbia $40,826,351

   3) Queen's University $28,287,631

   4) B.C. Cancer Research Centre $27,800,000

   5) Universite de Montreal $26,240,262

   6) McMaster University $17,859,999

   7) University of Western Ontario $16,938,387

   8) Ecole Polytechnique de Montreal $13,628,207

   9) University of Ottawa $11,989,238

   10) University of Toronto $11,639,976

GRAPHIC: Photo: Dr. Jack Gauldie: 'bench to bedside research'

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2002


                              448 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                     July 26, 2000 Wednesday Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A07

LENGTH: 559 words

HEADLINE: Mac eyes health research money

SOURCE: The Hamilton Spectator

BYLINE: Christine Cox

BODY:

   McMaster University hopes to be the "home" of at least one of 13 new health
research institutes announced in Ottawa yesterday.

   The institutes will be virtual facilities, linking researchers across the
country. But each one will have a scientific director based somewhere.

   The institutes will cover the areas of aboriginal people's health;
circulatory and respiratory health; cancer research; gender and health;
genetics; health services and policy research; healthy aging; human development
and child and youth health; infection and immunity; neurosciences, mental health
and addiction; musculoskeletal health and arthritis; nutrition, metabolism and
diabetes; and population and public health.

   McMaster president Peter George expects McMaster will have individuals
involved in all of the institutes. "We have to do some serious consideration of
which of these we think we should be recommending people for (as) potential
scientific directors."

   He said one issue would be the implications that the increased administrative
load would have for someone's own research program.

   "I'm reluctant to get into details except to say that we think it's an
outstanding initiative. We're very supportive and we expect McMaster to be a key
player. We'll wait and see; we may end up with scientific directors in one or
more of them."

   McMaster is a research-intensive university and George named numerous areas
of strength, including genetics, cancer research, child development, aging,
immunology and mental health.

   What sort of competition does McMaster face?

   George said the University of Toronto, McGill and the University of British
Columbia all have outstanding health sciences and health policy interests. He
noted that Ontario alone has five medical schools, all with significant
strengths.

   "Instead of seeing it as a competitive exercise, I'd rather see it overall as
a collaborative one ... It's the linking of research clusters around our common
research themes that's the huge benefit and promise of this approach."

   Yesterday's announcement came from Health Minister Allan Rock and Dr. Alan
Bernstein, the president of the Canadian Institutes of Health Research. The
process of recruiting scientific directors will start now so that
recommendations for appointment can be made in October.

   Bernstein said he didn't wish to prejudge the process, but he noted that
McMaster has "a wonderful set of researchers" in areas including clinical
research, population health and gene therapy.

   "There are some outstanding researchers at McMaster, as there are at other
Canadian universities. Our job will be to pick the very, very best scientific
leaders."

   Bernstein said he would be amazed if McMaster were not a major beneficiary of
the federal government's commitment to health research. "Evidence-based medicine
in this country really started at McMaster University."

   Bernstein expects funding for the 13 institutes will be in the range of $3
million to $5 million each in the first year.

   Meanwhile, McMaster could get a major funding boost today, when the Canada
Foundation for Innovation announces how it will invest more than $350 million at
universities and research institutions across Canada.

   "We have some very significant research proposals in, and we're very hopeful
that there will be some good news," George said.

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2002


                              451 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                       July 10, 2000 Monday Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH & SCIENCE; Pg. C04

LENGTH: 799 words

HEADLINE: Briefly

SOURCE: The Spectator

BODY:

   Brain research offers hope

   Bruise your arm, break your leg or skin your knee, and your body eventually
will repair the wound. But injure your brain, and there's little your body can
do about it. Or at least that's always been the prevailing wisdom.

   New research suggests that, at least in mice, an adult brain can grow new
cells.

   This raises hopes that someday new therapies will be developed to treat
neurological diseases or brain traumas in people.

   The research, by neuroscientists at Harvard Medical School, demonstrates for
the first time that it's possible to trigger stem cells -- in this case, neural
precursor cells -- to become mature neurons after other nerve cells have died.
The findings appear in a recent issue of the journal Nature.

   Building on previous research showing that transplanted precursor cells can
be guided to form new neurons, the researchers theorized that bringing the
molecular signals to where these precursors lie in the brain might be enough to
activate them into becoming mature neurons.

   New insight into blood pressure

   High blood pressure can kill you -- particularly if you get it when you're
young or pregnant. Yet, despite years of hard research, scientists have not been
able to pin down many of the disorder's genetic causes. Until now.

   In a study published in the July 7 Science magazine, a group of Yale
University researchers describes how they discovered a kidney-gene mutation in a
15-year-old boy that was responsible for his severe high blood pressure.

   The discovery looks like it will open the door to the causes of other, more
common forms of high blood pressure, which affect one in five people.

   It has also given researchers insight into high blood pressure during
pregnancy, which is experienced by 6 per cent to 8 per cent of pregnant women,
and particularly preeclampsia, a condition resulting from high blood pressure
that threatens the life of the pregnant woman.

   "This is a landmark study," says Dr. Beth Leventhal, a nephrologist at New
York Weill Cornell Medical Centre. "If we can continue to tease out each
individual mutation for hypertension within individual families, we can learn
more and more about potential genes that might be implicated in hypertension in
the general population."

   Hypertension during pregnancy is associated with low birth weight and early
labour. When it leads to preeclampsia, which affects 2.6 per cent to 6.3 per
cent of pregnant women, it puts the mother at risk for stroke and a ruptured
liver.

   Gene therapy speculation

   New research offers a ray of hope for people with the fatal blood disorder
called Cooley's anemia.

   Scientists have speculated that gene therapy may someday replace the
exhausting regimen of blood transfusions, iron-purging drugs and bone-marrow
transplants now used to treat the disorder, known as beta-thalassemia or
b-thalassemia. But animal tests have proved disappointing.

   Now, however, researchers at the Sloan-Kettering Institute in New York report
that a gene therapy approach has significantly reduced the symptoms of
b-thalassemia in mice, raising hopes for a human therapy down the road.

   People with this genetic blood disorder do not produce normal hemoglobin, the
part of red blood cells that carries oxygen, and, as a result, need blood
transfusions every two to three weeks.

   But there's also a catch: Iron in the transfused blood cells builds up and
becomes toxic in tissues and organs, particularly the liver and heart, and can
cause early death.

   Chocolate may be part of diet

   Here's the news all you chocolate lovers have been waiting for -- your
favourite sweet may actually be good for your heart.

   Researchers at the University of California at Davis have found that cocoa,
the main ingredient in chocolate, has an anti-inflammatory effect that lowers
the risk of blood clots, which can cause heart disease.

   "Our study suggests that chocolate may be part of a healthy diet when
consumed in moderation," says study author Carl Keen, professor of nutrition and
internal medicine at the school. Results of the study were published in the July
issue of the American Journal of Clinical Nutrition.

   Keen and his colleagues recruited 30 non-smokers with no history of heart
disease for the study. On separate occasions they each drank either water, a
caffeinated beverage, or a cocoa drink. Each time, blood samples were taken
before they drank the fluids, and then, two and six hours later.

   Researchers found blood platelets clotted less for those who drank the cocoa
mixture. Platelets, an important part of our red blood cells, are essential to
proper clotting when we are injured. But they can become too sticky or too
active, and then blood clots can form inside the body. If they're large enough,
they can cause a heart attack.

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2002


                              452 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Sun Media Corporation
                         Edmonton Sun (Alberta, Canada)

                     July 5, 2000, Wednesday, Final EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. 7, THE INSIDE STORY

LENGTH: 720 words

HEADLINE: LACK OF DOLLARS CHASING RESEARCHER AWAY

BYLINE: DOUG BEAZLEY, EDMONTON SUN

BODY:


   For a while, it was a bit like a game: building the world's fastest gene
sequencer, getting an oar into the biggest scientific megaproject since the moon
landing, talking up the potential of genetic engineering to cure everything from
cancer to heart disease.

   And then it happened. "A friend, six years ago, came into the office crying,
" said Dr. Norm Dovichi, a U of A analytical chemist. "She'd been diagnosed with
breast cancer.

   "That changed things. Before that, I'm sure our team was talking up the hype
on the Human Genome Project just like everyone else, making big claims about
what (gene therapy) could do.

   "But those claims are just words. We stopped making those claims after that.
And I stopped being quite so flip about what we could do. We have to be focused,
concentrate on the work that brings results."

   The friend, by the way, is doing fine. She's on the faculty of a major
Canadian university and dividing her time between her chemotherapy and raising a
baby daughter.

   And Dovichi's rep in the scientific community as the co-creator of the new
generation of gene sequencers has helped get him into another project that could
better the lives of cancer patients everywhere - by keeping them off the kind of
chemotherapy that only makes them sicker.

   Since late 1999, Dovichi has been working with Cross Cancer Institute
researcher Dr. John Mackey on developing a brand new biopsy test that can tell
doctors which patients will benefit from chemotherapy drugs, and which won't.

   The problem, said the 34-year-old Mackey, is that while the tumour-killing
drugs - called nucleosides - only work in 30% to 70% of cancer cases, they cause
vicious side effects in every patient that takes them.

   "We see serious immune system problems. Occasionally the drugs can create a
sort of AIDS-like condition, where the patient becomes extremely vulnerable to
infection," he said.

   "It damages the bone marrow, leading to a reduction in the number of red
blood cells. If we could find a way to determine beforehand which tumours won't
respond to the drugs, we could avoid these side effects in a lot of cases."

   Enter Dr. Dovichi. Over coffee last fall, Mackey told Dovichi he'd found a
way to distinguish tumour tissue that responds to nucleosides from the other
kind - but only in absolutely pure lab cultures consisting of millions of cells.
To be practical, the test would have to work on small biopsy samples consisting
of both cancerous and normal cells.

   "Once I looked at what they had, I realized it would be fairly
straightforward to develop a working test," said Dovichi.

   "Of course, every time I say the word 'straightforward' my grad students
cringe, because they know that means four years of hard work."

   So far, the working partnership seems to be going swimmingly. The two
scientists' areas of expertise dovetail nicely: Mackey knows the cell science
and Dovichi's sequencer work gives him detailed knowledge about designing lab
tests.

   "(Mackey) is a great oncologist and a delightful guy," said Dovichi.
"Although I sometimes look at him and wonder if he's old enough to drive."

   "The man is a genius," Mackey said of Dovichi. "The reality is that Dr.
Dovichi is a world-class researcher. If he were to be recruited south of the
border, it would be a real loss to Canadian science."

   Which is what's happening, of course. Last month, Dovichi told The Sun he
held the U of A responsible for the delays in funding and patenting that caused
him to lose first patent on the sequencer to a Japanese firm.

   Dovichi said he missed out on getting rich as a result - and the university
lost the $ 10 million to $ 20 million a year it could have made on a cut of the
machine's worldwide sales.

   That bad blood, coupled with what he calls a chronic shortage of public and
private funding for his work, is sending him south to one of two universities he
said are ardently courting him for their own research.

   But Dovichi has made Mackey one promise: he'll finish the chemotherapy
project from wherever he ends up.

   "Actually, it'll be easier from the U.S. because there's more research
funding," he said.

   "This work is important, and I don't want to waste any more time. If I can
help make one small advance that improves the lives of cancer patients, I'll be
ecstatic."

NOTES:
Comments? Write me at dbeazley@edm.sunpub.com

LOAD-DATE: July 5, 2000


                              453 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Sun Media Corporation
                         Edmonton Sun (Alberta, Canada)

                      July 3, 2000, Monday, Final EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. 7, THE INSIDE STORY

LENGTH: 714 words

HEADLINE: GENE PROJECT'S ANSWERS COME WITH RISKS

BYLINE: DOUG BEAZLEY, EDMONTON SUN

BODY:


   In medical research, the distance between failure and success is measured in
years. In a cancer ward, the distance between life and death sometimes can be
measured in months.

   When international researchers announced last week they'd virtually completed
the Human Genome Project - the charting of the estimated 3.12 billion molecular
units that make up a person's DNA - Kathy Fazackerley and her husband, Fred
Arnold, watched with more than a passing interest.

   Kathy has cancer. It started as breast cancer, spread to her lungs and liver
and, just recently, to her brain - beyond the reach of conventional
chemotherapy. Radiation isn't working either. She's in a city hospice, waiting
for what Arnold admits would have to be a miracle.

   "I've lost a father and a brother-in-law to this bastard disease. And now I
may lose my wife," he said.

   "But I believe there is a cure somewhere. Kathy doesn't want to give up, and
she doesn't want others to give up."

   The miracle may arrive faster than anticipated. But researchers say the day
when cancerous genes can be isolated and replaced like broken spark plugs is
still a long way off.

   "We have to go slowly," said Dr. Jean-Marc Nabholtz, a senior researcher at
Edmonton's Cross Cancer Institute.

   "The potential is great, but the risks are unknown. We have found the right
approach, but it won't have practical applications for several years."

   Nabholtz's own work is a good example of how the Human Genome Project has
given cancer research a shot in the arm. Fazackerley was one of the first
Edmontonians to have her cancer treated with a drug called Herceptin. It's a
"biological modifier" that controls a gene that causes cancers to grow very
fast.

   "It worked extremely well," said Arnold. "The lesion on Kathy's liver
practically disappeared. If the cancer hadn't spread to her brain, where the
drug can't act, she'd still be benefiting from it."

   This month, Nabholtz and researchers from 29 other countries begin Herceptin
trials on 15,000 breast cancer patients. Doctors hope to compare the trial
results to the genetic code information put together by the Human Genome
Project, to pinpoint exactly which genes respond to the drug.

   "(The comparison) should tell us how the gene is mis-expressing itself, and
why," said Nabholtz. "This information is going to be the basis of future gene
therapies."

   In other words, doctors already know Herceptin works. The Human Genome
Project will tell them why it works, and how they can come up with a more
lasting cure.

   To date, gene therapy hasn't cured anybody of anything; it's theory only, and
it's not risk-free. The conventional method of delivering a tailored gene into a
gene-damaged cell is through infecting the patient with a genetically-engineered
virus.

   After an Arizona teenager died last year of an extreme immune system reaction
brought on by an experimental viral gene therapy, the U.S. National Institute of
Health pushed for more strict reporting requirements by researchers doing gene
therapy trials.

   Which is one reason why Biomira, a local biotech firm, won't touch gene
therapy with a bargepole.

   "I think you take a risk whenever you introduce an engineered gene through a
virus," said Dr. Alex McPherson, Biomira CEO. His company has a vaccine in late
trials that shows promise as a breast cancer treatment.

   "We see our approach as simpler, lower-risk and easier for the regulatory
authorities to accept."

   Others criticize the pharmaceutical approach as short-sighted. Dr. Mike
Schultz, a University of Alberta biochemist, has spent nine years studying yeast
cells and pinpointing genes responsible for controlling their growth.

   Comparisons to the human genome database have shown him similar human genes
that might be responsible for the uncontrolled growth of cancer cells.

   "The genome project reverses how we normally do science," he said. "Usually
you start with an idea based on old information, and that information might lead
you in the wrong direction.

   "With the genome project, all the information is there. We just don't know
what it means yet. If anything, everyone has been underestimating what the Human
Genome Project really means. It's going to have an impact on medical research we
can't even guess at."

NOTES:
Comments? Write me at dbeazley@edm.sunpub.com

LOAD-DATE: July 3, 2000


                              457 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                      June 27, 2000 Tuesday Final Edition

SECTION: BLUEPRINT FOR THE FUTURE; Pg. D05

LENGTH: 553 words

HEADLINE: Personalized medicine; Treatments will be tailor-made

SOURCE: The Independent

BYLINE: Steve Connor

DATELINE: LONDON

BODY:

   Medicine in the 21st century will be revolutionized by the decoding of the
human genome -- the three billion letters in the human "Book of Life".

   Knowing the full DNA sequence, the digital recipe of our genes, will enable
scientists to predict inherited predispositions to disease and to develop
tailor-made drugs.

   It opens the doors to an era of "personalized medicine", with each patient
being treated according to their unique genetic signature.

   John Sulston, the director of the Sanger Centre in Cambridge, which decoded
about one-third of the genome, said the future of medicine was genomic: "Over
the decades and centuries to come, this sequence will inform all of medicine,
all of biology, and will lead us to a total understanding of not only human
beings but all of life."

   A battery of new genetic tests for single-gene defects, such as cystic
fibrosis and muscular dystrophy, has been developed, but knowing the full genome
will accelerate that pace of discovery enormously.

   Nearly 5,000 inherited disorders are known to be caused by mutations in just
one of the 60,000 or so human genes. Many of the more common disorders, from
heart disease and cancer to Alzheimer's and Parkinson's, are known to be at
least partially determined by a genetic component.

   Being able to find the defects that turn a healthy gene into a potential
killer not only enables scientists to develop new diagnostic tests, but gives
them a handle on how to develop better treatments.

   It also opens the way to the possibility of correcting genetic defects by
gene therapy -- the surgical replacement or augmentation of diseased genes with
healthy copies.

   Professor Tony Monaco, of the Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics at
Oxford University, said the full genome sequence will enable "gene hunters" to
find a new one in a year instead of the three or four years it took in the past.

   "This has enormous significance for biology and disease research since we
previously only knew a fraction of the genes and now we will know all the
players. Future research will be to understand how they all function and
interact in the cells that make up our body," Monaco said.

   Everyone's DNA sequence is 99.99 per cent identical, but it is the
differences that become important in knowing why some become ill, some cannot
take certain drugs and some die prematurely.

   Part of the genome project is to identify the smallest mutations that
distinguish one person from another, so-called single nucleotide polymorphisms
or SNPs, pronounced "snips". Scientists describe SNPs as the most detailed
genetic "signposts" that can predict a patient's future susceptibility to
disease.

   David Bentley, the head of human genetics at the Sanger Centre, said a single
SNP difference can determine if a person has high cholesterol levels in their
blood, which can lead to a significant difference in the relative risks of heart
disease.

   "Knowledge of such a genetic change in advance would lead to the prescription
of a different drug or the prescription of lower dose," Bentley said.

   Michael Morgan, the chief executive of the Wellcome Trust's Genome Campus in
Cambridge, said that comparing a patient's genomic differences with the human
genome "gold standard" would enable doctors of the future to treat patients as
real individuals.

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2002


                              458 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                      June 27, 2000 Tuesday Final Edition

SECTION: BLUEPRINT FOR THE FUTURE; Pg. D07

LENGTH: 631 words

HEADLINE: Briefly

SOURCE: The Spectator

BODY:

   Liver disease breakthrough

   For the first time scientists have unlocked a key part of the mystery of how
the liver is able to re-grow itself after damage, the only organ in the body
able to do so.

   Immature cells called stem cells, the "master cells" of the body, are
recruited from bone marrow and turned into fully functional liver cells in
humans, the researchers found. The discovery could revolutionize how liver
cancer, cirrhosis and other incurable liver diseases are treated.

   "These cells potentially could be used as a source of cells for liver
transplants, as a pool of cells for the development of an artificial liver and
in gene therapy to treat many liver diseases," said Dr. Neil Theise, associate
professor of pathology at New York University School of Medicine, who made the
discovery with a research team that included scientists from Yale University
School of Medicine and Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Centre in New York.

   The study was published yesterday in the journal, Hepatology.

   Pot may promote tumours

   The chemical that produces a high when a person smokes pot may weaken the
body's ability to fight cancer, a study in mice reveals.

   Researchers, funded by the National Institute on Drug Abuse, have shown for
the first time that tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), marijuana's main psychoactive
chemical, suppresses the immune system and promotes tumour growth in mice with
lung cancer.

   "We had known from previous studies in test tubes that THC could suppress the
immune system," says Dr. Steven Dubinett, a professor of medicine at the Jonsson
Cancer Centre, affiliated with the University of California at Los Angeles. "THC
decreases the activity of white blood cells by interacting with specific
receptors on the cells. The white cells then turn into factories, producing
immune suppressive proteins in response to THC."

   Dubinett says he and his colleagues "injected THC into mice that were bearing
tumors, and we found that the tumors grew more rapidly. We believe this was
caused by an increase in immune suppressive proteins that are naturally made in
the body."

   The findings appear in the July issue of Journal of Immunology.

   Women susceptible to tobacco

   Women appear to be more susceptible to lung cancer than men.

   That's one of the key findings from a recent study of 1,000 men and women at
New York Presbyterian Hospital in New York City.

   Researchers concluded women 60 or older have about a 2.3 times greater risk
of lung cancer than men. But they aren't sure why that's happening.

   "Women may inhale cigarette smoke differently than men. They may metabolize
carcinogens differently. And there may be an estrogen or hormonal cause,"
speculates Dr. David Yankelevitz. He is a professor of radiology at Weill
Medical College of Cornell University and a staff member at New York
Presbyterian Hospital.

   All Yankelevitz and researchers know for sure is that women appear to have a
greater susceptibility to tobacco carcinogens than men.

   Arthritis-blocker possible

   There may be a way to prevent arthritis by blocking a key part of the immune
system that causes inflammation, a recent study says.

   "In an animal model, it was found that animals could not get rheumatoid
arthritis if they were missing a single component of the immune system called
C5," says Dr. Leonard Bell, president and chief executive officer of Alexion
Pharmaceuticals Inc.

   Scientists from Alexion and Yale University collaborated on the study, which
included mice bred to lack the C5 component -- a crucial factor in the
inflammation process involved in rheumatoid arthritis. In experiments, arthritis
was induced with antigens in more than 90 per cent of normal mice, but it
couldn't be produced in the ones that lacked the C5 component.

   --Spectator news services

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2002


                              461 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Sun Media Corporation
                                The Toronto Sun

                      June 18, 2000, Sunday, Final EDITION

SECTION: LIFESTYLE, Pg. 62, HEALTH NOTES

LENGTH: 713 words

HEADLINE: HEALTH NOTES COLUMN

BYLINE: MARILYN LINTON, TORONTO SUN

BODY:


   TONGUE DEPRESSOR

   The Academy of General Dentistry in the U.S. has come out against tongue
piercing. In a recent newsletter, the academy points out that fractured teeth
are a common side-effect of this form of body piercing.

   "Every time you swallow, the barbell hits the teeth, causing constant
irritation," says Dr. Manuel Cordero. "It's enough to cause ulcers, which in
turn can become pre-cancerous lesions." Yuck!

   Dentists also warn that oral infections may also occur as a result of the
piercing. "The moment the tongue is punctured, bacteria is introduced into the
blood," Cordero says. Oral infections may be linked to other infections such as
heart disease, he adds.

   Special precautions must be taken if you decide to pierce your tongue. To
avoid serious infections such as HIV or hepatitis, make sure that everything is
sterilized in an autoclave, the same kind of sterilizer that is used on medical
instruments.

   Ask the piercer questions about after care, cleanliness, equipment and other
concerns.

   Remove the jewelry when you eat or sleep and clean the piercing with an
antiseptic mouthwash after every meal. Brush the jewelry daily to remove plaque.

   MEMORIES ARE MADE OF THIS

   Getting older, forgetting where you left your car keys? According to The
Doctors Book Of Home Remedies For Sharper Memory (Prevention Magazine), there's
a smorgasbord of lifestyle tips, smart foods and ingenious recall tricks to help
you fine tune your memory. The tips, gathered from 10 doctors who specialize in
memory disorders, include the following:

   - Become an art critic. Since the process of appreciating art calls for so
many different thinking skills, heading out to your local art museum reaps
brain-boosting rewards.

   - Think of smell as a memory preserver. We've all had experiences whereby we
recall certain memories when a certain forgotten smell wafts our way. Experts
say the reverse is also true: By invigorating your "odor universe" and linking
smells to experiences, you can send them straight to your long-term memory.

   - Splice together a sound bite. To remember a list of anything, put it into a
silly sentence; it's an old school trick, but a good one. So, need to remember
to buy juice, apples, milk and lettuce? Instead, remember the sentence "John ate
my leg." Or make a list.

   - Say a word to stay wise. Craft an acronym to recall names of the clients
you're meeting in the morning. So, Fred, Lisa, Evan and Adam become FLEA.

   - Paint a mind picture. Working on the theory that images take up less brain
space than words, psychologist Michael Woods suggests you think of a lumberjack
named Big John walking through the woods to remember the name John Woods.

   POLO FOR HEART

   Peter Liu, one of Canada's brightest cardiac doctors, doesn't play the game
that supports his research. But then, few people do.

   Dr. Liu holds the Heart and Stroke Foundation of Ontario's Polo for Heart
chair at the University of Toronto; next weekend, the annual Polo for Heart
series takes place at the Gormley Polo Centre.

   This hockey-on-horseback sporting event has committed to raising funds in
support of the chair and Liu's work, which is on going in a number of heart
disease-related areas, such as congestive heart failure, a field in which Liu is
considered a world-renowned expert.

   Another of his areas includes research into the role of viruses in heart
disease. While the virus theory of heart disease has been talked about for
years, Liu's group actually discovered the exact molecular mechanism that makes
this happen.

   The industrious Liu's other ongoing studies include an examination of the way
in which a common bacteria may cause hardening of the arteries, and the
development of a new gene therapy to treat patients with congestive heart
failure.

   Admission to Polo for Heart is only $ 10 per person (kids under 12 are free)
at the Gormley Polo Centre in Richmond Hill. The event, which takes place Friday
- Sunday, June 23 - 25, begins at 11 a.m. and includes not only the polo games
but also a petting zoo for kids, a Lego tent, skydivers, kite flying, model
airplanes and boutiques that sell everything from jewelry to toys. Bring a
blanket and a picnic, and stay the day! For more information, call 489-7111,
ext. 505.

GRAPHIC: 1. photo by Craig Robertson 2. photo by Mike Cassese

LOAD-DATE: June 19, 2000


                              463 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                      June 10, 2000 Saturday Final Edition

SECTION: OBSERVER; Pg. D04

LENGTH: 1537 words

HEADLINE: Mapping three billion parts of us; The first draft of the human genome
is almost complete. It will be hailed for its medical promise. But it also
creates dilemmas for ethics and theology.

SOURCE: The Christian Science Monitor

BYLINE: Laurent Belsie

DATELINE: ST. LOUIS

BODY:

   Not since Charles Darwin put forward his theory of evolution have natural
scientists sparked such broad rethinking of that bedrock question: What is man?
Geneticists' unveiling of the first complete sequence of the human genetic code
-- expected later this month -- is already causing a stir in the fields of
medicine and law.

   Ultimately, this scientific breakthrough, like Darwin's bombshell, could
challenge fixed social and theological ideas about humanity and its place in the
universe.

   Troubling ethical questions -- such as eugenics for the unborn and genetic
profiling for health insurance -- are only the beginning.

   In mapping the human body's genetic code, researchers are framing a new
context for an age-old debate: Is human nature the product of free will or
predestination?

   "The mapping information is going to help us rethink a whole lot of issues
such as privacy, confidentiality, ownerships of body parts," says Tom Shannon,
professor of religion and social ethics at Worcester Polytechnic Institute and
author of a new book on the subject. "It's really going to reshape how we think
about each other."

   For the medical profession, such changes will take time.

   For one thing, the sequence is so long -- some three billion parts -- someone
would have to spend more than 47 years round the clock merely to write it out.
For another, the sequence that researchers hope to unveil this month will still
be a working draft -- incomplete and filled with small errors -- that might not
be finalized until 2003.

   Even then, scientists won't understand the genome.

   "Imagine that you have the entire works of Shakespeare in front of you, with
no spaces and no grammar, and you don't know English," explains Betsey Dyer, a
genetics researcher and biology professor at Wheaton College in Norton, Mass.
That's what the complete sequence will look like. It could take decades to crack
it.

   Still, the complete sequence will mark a new plateau in scientific
understanding. Two research teams -- privately funded Celera Genomics in
Rockville, Md., and a much larger publicly funded effort by academic,
government, and foreign researchers -- are racing to complete the sequence.

   "It will revolutionize information about how our bodies work, how our bodies
develop. It will lead to drugs and products that cure disease and prevent
illness in the first place," says Michael Werner, bioethics counsel for the
Biotechnology Industry Organization in Washington.

   Already, it is shaking the legal profession, particularly in areas of patents
and privacy.

   For starters, should companies own pieces of the human genetic code? "The
ability to obtain patent rights on human genome information can be incredibly
commercially valuable," says Elizabeth Weiswasser, partner in the international
law firm of Weil, Gotshal & Manges, headquartered in New York City.

   The United States has offered patents on gene sequences for years. What's
new, she says, are mass efforts at sequencing, which portend a flood of patents
and court challenges as companies jockey for commercial advantage.

   Privacy represents another looming legal tangle.

   If doctors, armed with an individual's genetic code, eventually believe they
can diagnose that a person in his 20s will incur a life-threatening disease in
his 50s, who should know that information? The person? His relatives? His
employer or insurer? "We're not interested in genetic testing," says Herb Perone
of the American Council of Life Insurers in Washington.

   But, if such testing becomes routine medical practice, "we don't want to be
denied basic information in the future." Evidence of actual discrimination in
the workplace remains mostly anecdotal. When the American Management Association
surveyed more than 1,000 of its members last year, only three said they used
genetic testing on employees or job applicants.

   But already a national women's advocacy group, the National Partnership for
Women & Families, is warning women about how data gleaned from genetic testing
can be used against them. In February, President Bill Clinton prohibited federal
agencies from using such data to hire, fire, or promote federal workers. At
least two dozen states offer spotty protection against genetic discrimination,
but there's no federal standard.

   Such questions stretch far beyond the legal realm, ethicists say. For people
diagnosed with a fatal disease that's years away, "how do you live your life?"
Professor Shannon asks. "If this child is fated to die, does that mean the child
is going to be rejected -- a kind of genetic leprosy? ... It's putting the whole
question of human mortality in a much different perspective."

   One of the first debates will erupt over the increased use of genetic
screening of unborn babies for a new range of deficiencies, predicts Phillip
Sloan, director of Notre Dame University's Program in Science, Technology, and
Values. Unfortunately, doctors will be able to detect those defects long before
they've developed any cures. That could push prospective parents into a thicket
of ethical problems. Should they abort those children doctors believe will
develop a genetic disease later in life? As the medical advances of the
technology become clearer, society will likely face bigger ethical dilemmas,
Sloan points out.

   For example, if medical geneticists one day are able to eliminate certain
defects for a generation and all its descendants, what would be the
consequences? Would it be ethical to add certain traits by genetic manipulation?
What constitutes improvement anyway: Freedom from disease? Being thin? Tall? The
world's unfortunate experiences with the eugenics movement in the 1920s and '30s
-- including the mass sterilization of people thought to be genetically
defective --make many scientists and medical ethicists uneasy about using
technology this way.

   Of course, such visions may not come to pass, experts caution. At the very
time that popular culture is beginning to contemplate genetic science in very
simplistic ways, researchers are uncovering far more complexity.

   There is no one gene for blue eyes or alcoholism or intelligence, for
example.

   Genes don't tell the whole story. They merely punch out a very complex code
that gets translated into an expression of proteins which, scientists say, may
not act the same way every time. Where they're located in the body, the presence
of other genes, personal behavior, and a person's environment may all play a
role in health and development, they say.

   "It's more complex than we originally thought," says Ari Patrinos, director
of the office that oversees the U.S. Energy Department's genome research. Some
diseases and physical traits may turn out to be too random to predict with any
certainty, he adds.

   In fact, so little is known about gene therapy that researchers may have to
slow their clinical trials on people, some experts say.

   In a clinical experiment last fall, teenager Jesse Gelsinger died several
days after University of Pennsylvania researchers injected him with genetic
material.

   The teenager had volunteered for the clinical trial but, according to his
father, was not fully informed of the risks involved.

   Nor was he told that the lead researcher had founded a private company with
exclusive rights to discoveries at his university institute.

   The case hints at ethicists' concern over commercialization: For all its
scientific promise, it may also put patients at risk.

   The U.S. Food and Drug Administration has accused the University of
Pennsylvania lab of safety violations. Last month, the lab stopped clinical
trials.

   Meanwhile, the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services is stepping up
its monitoring of all clinical trials and plans to force federally funded
researchers to disclose to prospective patients their financial stake in any
clinical trial.

   Legally speaking, the science may be too new for anybody to properly give
consent, suggests Franklin Zweig, president of the Einstein Institute for
Science, Health, and the Courts.

   Perhaps the largest implications of the genome project lie with humanity's
view of God and itself. Are men and women puppets, genetically destined to live
a specific length of time with a certain level of intelligence and temperament?
If altruism is predetermined by a special set of genes, does God even exist?
Even many genetic researchers reject such notions. "I don't believe in the
excuse: 'My genes made me do it,'" says John Rodwell, acting head of AxCell
Biosciences in Newtown, Pa.

   "I think that's bad science and bad theology all rolled into one," says
Suzanne Holland, professor of religious and social ethics at the University of
Puget Sound in Tacoma, Wash.

   "That is to say that there is no free will -- that everything's in the
genes." In fact, the complexity of genetic science may lead thought the opposite
direction, she says.

   "This sort of combination of genes with the interplay of the environment is
so magnificent and contains within it so much mystery that to my mind it's more
reason for belief in God.

   "We might come to see God as far more involved in the world than the
Newtonian mechanistic view of a God that sets up everything and steps out of the
way."

GRAPHIC: Photo: KNIGHT RIDDER; Dr. J. Craig Ventner, president, left, and Dr.
Robert Waterston of Celera Genomics, the private company involved in the gene
mapping project.; Photo: KNIGHT RIDDER; The complicated nature of the procedure
is reflected in the partial DNA film.

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2002


                              470 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                       May 30, 2000 Tuesday Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH & SCIENCE; Pg. D04

LENGTH: 710 words

HEADLINE: Implant therapygives new life; Brain implants reverse strokes

SOURCE: N.Y. Times News Service

BYLINE: Andrew Pollack

BODY:

   Sylvia Elam saw the benefits of her operation as soon as she was wheeled into
the recovery room and ate lunch. For the first time in years, she could taste
the food.

   After a stroke in 1993, Elam, of Scottsdale, Ariz., lost most of the movement
and sensation on her right side. But last year she became one of the first
people in the world to have cells manufactured in a laboratory implanted into
her brain. The implant enabled Elam, now 66, to talk again without stammering,
to throw a ball with her right arm, to walk somewhat without a cane and even to
drive a car.

   "It was absolutely beyond our wildest dreams," said Elam's husband, Ira.

   Not all cases have had such positive results, but hope is growing that neural
cells implanted into the brain can replace damaged cells and restore functions
lost to stroke, spinal cord injury or neurological diseases like Parkinson's and
Alzheimer's, most of which have no effective treatments.

   "It's almost like reseeding your lawn," said Dr. Evan Snyder, a neurologist
at Children's Hospital in Boston and at Harvard Medical School, who has
successfully used the technique to treat rats with a disease similar to multiple
sclerosis.

   In Elam's case, a few months after the operation she suffered setbacks as a
result of a second, apparently unrelated, stroke.

   The quest to restore the neural connections in the brain has been spurred by
two recent scientific developments. One was the isolation of so-called stem
cells, the primordial cells from which all others evolve, that can potentially
be made into neural cells for transplantation.

   In addition, in tests conducted in animals, the cells have had the ability to
migrate through the brain to where they are needed to repair damage.

   A second development was the discovery that adult brains continue to produce
new cells, overturning conventional wisdom that brain cells are not replenished.
This suggests some capacity for nervous system regeneration.

   The discoveries have set off a race by companies hoping to develop cells to
be sold for neural transplantation, part of the larger field of regenerative
medicine. But harnessing such cells will require negotiating a minefield not
only of technical challenges but of ethical ones, since most stem cells come
from either embryos discarded by fertility clinics or aborted fetuses.

   Some scientists and business executives worry that the neural implant field
will repeat the history of gene therapy, which has gone through 10 years of
largely dashed hopes, controversial clinical trials and burned investors, though
there have been some recent signs of success.

   "We would do well to learn the lesson from the troubled path of the gene
therapy field: not to promise too much too early," wrote Anders Bjorklund and
Olle Lindvall, Swedish scientists, in a commentary in the June issue of Nature
Neuroscience.

   They said they see signs of a rush toward "ill-founded clinical trials"
without adequate scientific rationale.

   Still, the two scientists have been implanting brain tissue from aborted
human fetuses into the brains of people with Parkinson's disease, which causes a
loss of motor skills, for almost a decade. In some patients the treatment has
caused a slight improvement in motor control, which has lasted 5 to 10 years.

   But such treatment, which has also been done in this country, requires
several fetuses for each patient. Moral questions notwithstanding, there are
simply not enough fetuses to treat this nation's million or more Parkinson's
patients.

   So scientists are searching for cells that can be mass produced -- "neurons
in a bottle," said George W. Dunbar Jr., acting chief executive officer of
StemCells Inc., in Sunnyvale, Calif., one of the companies pursuing the
treatments.

   The cells implanted in Elam were supplied by Layton BioScience Inc., also of
Sunnyvale, and derived from testicular cancer cells isolated from a patient in
the 1970s. Scientists found, almost serendipitously, that when treated with
chemicals called retinoids, some of the cells turned into neural cells. Six of
the 12 stroke patients treated with the cells had some improvement in motor
skills, said Dr. John Kondziolka, the University of Pittsburgh neurosurgeon who
performed the operations.

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2002


                              471 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                      May 24, 2000 Wednesday Final Edition

SECTION: CANADA & WORLD; Pg. D03

LENGTH: 356 words

HEADLINE: U.S. cracking down on medical research violations; Erring scientists,
universities face stiff fines

SOURCE: N.Y. Times News Service

BYLINE: Sheryl Gay Stolberg

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   The Clinton administration announced yesterday that it would seek authority
from Congress to levy fines of up to $250,000 US ($377,000 Cdn) on scientists
who violate federal human research rules and $1 million US ($1.5 million Cdn) on
the universities that employ them.

   The proposed fines are part of a broad plan, unveiled yesterday by U.S.
Secretary of Health and Human Services Donna Shalala to improve protection for
the thousands of patients who volunteer each year for medical experiments, from
tests of new drugs to cutting-edge treatments like gene therapy.

   The announcement comes two days before officials are to testify at a Senate
hearing on patient safety.

   Under the plan, which U.S. President Bill Clinton described as "a critical
first step" toward improving patient safety, the government will require
bioethics training for clinical researchers and will lay down clear
conflict-of-interest guidelines for doctors who have financial stakes in their
studies.

   There will be new requirements for monitoring small clinical experiments,
which are not subjected to the same intense regulatory scrutiny as larger
studies. And, Shalala said, research institutions will now be required to audit
records for proof that patients have truly given their "informed consent" to
participate.

   "This is a clear message that we intend to get serious," Shalala said. Saying
she was concerned about maintaining public confidence in medical research, she
added, "We have to make sure that the entire enterprise is rigorous and has
enormous integrity."

   With the exception of the move to assess fines, which requires congressional
action, Shalala said the initiatives outlined would take effect immediately.

   At a briefing announcing the plan, Shalala was flanked by Dr. Jane E. Henney,
who heads the Food and Drug Administration, and Dr. Ruth Kirschstein, acting
director of the National Institutes of Health. Both agencies have come under
criticism for lax oversight of gene therapy experiments, particularly since the
death of an 18-year-old patient, Jesse Gelsinger, at the University of
Pennsylvania last fall.

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2002


                              474 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                      May 11, 2000 Thursday Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A13

LENGTH: 2680 words

HEADLINE: The Alzheimer's dilemma; Debilitating disease forces caregivers to say
when enough is enough

SOURCE: The Hamilton Spectator

BYLINE: Susan Clairmont

BODY:

   STATE OF MIND; Day five of a nine-part series examining mental health issues

   The intruder has sneaked into thousands of Canadian homes, taking every
member of the household hostage.

   Each person is tied up and worn down. They are robbed of their health and
their peace of mind. And they are given a brutal, often unsatisfying choice:
sacrifice your loved one or be sacrificed yourself.

   The intruder is Alzheimer's disease. It affects the mental and physical
health not only of the person whose brain it destroys but also of those loved
ones who become the caregivers.

   Alzheimer's stole into the Randall Avenue home Jean Brush shared with her
husband Cecil for 40 years. Jean rejected the choices offered to her when
Cecil's Alzheimer's became too much for either of them to bear. Instead, on a
summer day in 1994, Jean picked Cecil up from the nursing home where he'd lived
for less than a week. Cecil announced he would not go back.

   "Jean, do something," he said.

   Jean spread blankets on their dining room floor, led her husband into the
room and plunged a knife into him twice. She then pierced her own body five
times before wrapping the blanket around their limbs and preparing to die.

   He died. She didn't.

   Alzheimer's also made its way into Helen Grogan's home in Dundas, where she
and husband Gerry planned to live out their years. Gerry was a devoted caregiver
who still took his wife to favourite restaurants she no longer recognized. Two
days before Christmas last year, they returned home after one such outing.
During the few seconds it took Gerry to put the car in the garage, Helen
disappeared. She was found hours later on a Hamilton railway track. She had been
struck by a train and killed.

   Another Hamilton family made its painful choice after Alzheimer's invaded
their home. Their mother needed more care than they could provide so they placed
her in Macassa Lodge to be safe.

   But a few months ago they discovered she wasn't safe. Staff found her with a
male Alzheimer's patient, both naked from the waist down. The family believes
their mother was sexually assaulted. The lodge's administrators say the
residents were caught in a moment of consensual intimacy.

   Ask experts where the safest, healthiest environment generally is for people
suffering from Alzheimer's and they will say the person's own home or that of a
close relative.

   Ask what the safest, healthiest option is for a caregiver looking after
someone with Alzheimer's and the answer generally is to put the person with
dementia into a long-term care facility.

   Not only are these approaches at odds with each other but there are many,
many unpredictable exceptions to the generalities. Life is not always better for
an Alzheimer's patient at home. And life is not always easier for a caregiver
who places a loved one in a nursing home.

   That is the paradox of coping with Alzheimer's disease.

   There are 316,500 Canadians over 65 suffering from the disease or another
form of dementia such as Parkinson's or the after-effects of strokes, according
to the Alzheimer Society of Canada. Experts estimate half live in private homes.
More than 98 per cent have caregivers, almost all unpaid family members or
friends. In 37 per cent of cases, the caregiver is a spouse and 29 per cent of
the time it is a daughter.

   The other half of Alzheimer's patients live in institutional settings, in
turn making up 50 per cent of the population. All but the newest long-term care
facilities were built for people with physical, not mental illnesses. Most
nursing homes are not properly designed to meet the needs of Alzheimer's
patients who need room to walk without getting lost, lots of colour and texture
to stimulate their senses and a homey atmosphere to provide comfort.

   In 1991 the net annual societal cost of care for dementia in Canada was over
$3.9 billion. It can cost up to $36,794 a year to care for one institutionalized
patient with severe Alzheimer's.

   Many more facilities designed specifically for Alzheimer's patients will have
to be built in the next three decades. By 2031, 750,000 baby boomers in this
country are expected to have Alzheimer's. It is the fastest growing disease
among our seniors -- not because the rate is changing but because the number of
seniors is growing.

   Ontario is the only province with any plan to cope with the disease. Research
and training for physicians and nurses will receive $68.4 million in a five-year
strategy that was announced last fall.

   Alzheimer's causes a progressive, irreversible loss of mental ability and
function, often accompanied by personality changes and emotional instability. It
is not a normal part of aging despite the once common belief that senility
naturally accompanies old age.

   There are two types of Alzheimer's disease. The first is sporadic, which can
strike adults at any age, but usually after 65. The second is familial autosomal
dominant Alzheimer's disease, which runs in certain families.

   In 1906, symptoms of the disease were discovered by German neurologist Alois
Alzheimer. Until recently, the only way to accurately diagnose the disease was
through an autopsy, which would reveal knotted tangles inside the hippocampi,
two parts of the brain tissue associated with memory and learning. These protein
deposits, called plaques and neurofibrillary tangles, can also be found between
the cells.

   Only since the early 1990s have specialists developed neurological and
psychological tests to diagnose living patients with Alzheimer's. The tests are
about 90 per cent accurate.

   The disease affects a person's ability to understand, think, remember and
communicate. The Alzheimer Society of Canada says the person will gradually be
unable to learn new things and make decisions -- forgetting how to do simple
tasks, having trouble remembering names, forgetting what they were about to do
or having difficulty finding the right word to express a thought.

   A person with Alzheimer's becomes more withdrawn but at the same time can
have unpredictable, often inappropriate emotions. She might become worried and
suspicious.

   The disease usually runs over a 10-year period from the first symptoms to
complete dependence and finally to death, often caused by pneumonia.

   It is a long, difficult road for caregivers to travel.

   Larry Chambers, a professor of epidemiology and director of the R. Samuel
McLaughlin Centre of Research and Education in Aging and Health at McMaster
University, says there are 90 services in the community to support caregivers, a
sufficient number to serve the population. Yet many families are reluctant to
ask for the help.

   While it's easy to think of a stream of professional health care workers
coming into the home as a blessing, in truth it's usually more like an invasion
of privacy and an erosion of the caregiver's autonomy.

   At the same time that caregivers are trying to come to terms with the
devastating changes the illness is causing in their loved one, they must also
brace themselves against the physically exhausting and sometimes dangerous side
of care taking, says Olga Malott, director of the Murray Alzheimer's Research
and Education Program at the University of Waterloo.

   "We don't want people to think that simply because a person with dementia is
being cared for at home that the whole neighbourhood should be afraid," says
Malott. But at the same time, those closest to the person could be at risk of
injury and health problems.

   Those unfamiliar with the behaviour of Alzheimer's patients may think they
are having temper tantrums for absolutely no reason. To watch a relative who was
always gentle and soft-spoken suddenly acting out is a very difficult sight for
caregivers to witness. Aggressive and hyper-sexual behaviour in someone with
dementia is something few caregivers want to acknowledge, let alone seek help
for.

   In fact, there is almost always a reason for the outbursts. It just takes
insight and patience for a caregiver to discover what it is. A person who can no
longer speak may have to express such basic conditions as hunger, cold, or a
full bladder by kicking, screaming or hitting. Or it may signal they are afraid.

   Malott likens Alzheimer's to being snatched up by a spaceship and taken to an
entirely strange world where you neither recognize nor understand anybody around
you. The fear of such unfamiliar surrounding can cause you to lash out in order
to protect yourself.

   Malott says those with dementia may also become aggressive when they are
frustrated or under stress. It's important not to set the person with dementia
up for failure.

   Some people with the disease will have had a history of explosive or
aggressive behaviour throughout their lives. For them, the illness might only
exacerbate their behaviour.

   "If they were violent to begin with, this disease isn't going to turn them
into a sweet person," says Malott.

   If there is another psychiatric disorder on top of the Alzheimer's, such as
schizophrenia, it is difficult to sort out which condition is causing which
behaviours. In that case, it takes a comprehensive psychiatric assessment to
"peel back the layers of the diseases" in an effort to then find the best
treatment.

   Caregivers must learn to deal with the outbursts and with labour-intensive
tasks such as bathing and dressing a person unable to do anything for themselves
or coping with the wandering that is a common symptom.

   "You practically can never let them out of your sight," says Malott. "They
may want to be going to work or they may be trying to get home. Those are long
ingrained routines and the changes in their brain push them to be active."

   The greatest taboo subject of all surrounding Alzheimer's is sex. People with
dementia can still have it and still want it. The problem was summarized in an
academic paper published in Geriatrics and Aging by Dr. Maggie Gibson, a
psychologist at Parkwood Hospital in London. She says that "behaviours normally
conducted only in private or only with certain partners may be exhibited in
public or without discrimination as to partnership."

   The patient may be constantly demanding sex from her spouse or may want
nothing to do with intimacy. Or he may be making overtures toward other people
while the spouse watches.

   Male patients with the disease often touch themselves in ways that at first
seem inappropriate, but experts say this is often simply a sign that they have
to use the bathroom.

   There are also problems when a caregiver continues to place sexual demands on
a demented partner. It is essential, says Malott, that the spouse be certain the
person with dementia is consenting. That's not an easy judgment to make, she
adds, but without consent, a once loving, intimate act can become a violation.

   Other times, the line between care and abuse is much more obvious.

   Malott says some caregivers find themselves looking after somebody they never
really liked anyway and may use the opportunity to be abusive. Other times, a
caregiver is simply so overwhelmed that they begin taking out their frustrations
on the person they are supposed to be helping.

   She knows of one man who tied his wife to the toilet every morning until she
had a bowel movement. He did it because he couldn't stand changing her soiled
clothes.

   It is usually after some kind of a crisis -- a fall, a slap, a disappearance
-- that a caregiver will place their loved one in a long-term care facility.

   Even when they have reached the end of their rope, caregivers see themselves
as failures when they can no longer keep their ill relative at home and they
feel extremely guilty.

   Society has sent the message that caretaking is the family's responsibility,
says Chambers, the McMaster epidemiologist. That message can have devastating
effects on a caregiver's health.

   Studies Chambers has conducted show caregivers have a higher incidence of
chronic diseases such as hypertension, heart disease and arthritis than people
who are not caregivers.

   "Those people who suffer from depression when they are the caregiver, the
depression goes away when the relative is institutionalized," he says

   But depression can often set in for the patient once he or she is
institutionalized. That's one of the reasons why Rudy Siemens recommends
patients stay at home as long as possible.

   As the administrator for Tabor Manor in St. Catharines and a past executive
of the Ontario Not For Profit Housing Services for Seniors, Siemens is all in
favour of long-term care facilities. But he knows a nursing home can never
replace the comfort of the patient's own home. It's difficult for people with
dementia to get used to a new environment, he says.

   Though Tabor Manor does not have locked wings to keep Alzheimer's patients
from wandering away, many facilities do. Living in a locked wing is like living
in jail, says Siemens.

   "When people feel locked in, their behaviour becomes exaggerated. They get
more and more frustrated."

   Though the trend in our health care system is to provide more support for
caregivers, Chambers wonders if this will be enough to ensure the future of home
care.

   Unlike the current generation of people with dementia who have likely had the
same spouse for many years, baby boomers may have had several spouses and a
complicated extended family. This makes it more difficult to determine who will
take the responsibility of being the caregiver, Chambers says.

   Also, today's seniors show considerable deference to authority, far more than
younger generations, who may become a greater caregiving challenge.

   Chambers also says that with the trend amongst boomers to downsize their
homes after the children leave coupled with an even younger generation's
tendency to live in modest-sized homes, it will be difficult to find room for
the person with Alzheimer's to live with their family.

   The community has to decide where it's going to put its resources for
Alzheimer's care in the future, says Chambers. It has to decide what message to
send families about their responsibility for their loved ones.

   "But first," he says, "the community has to decide how much it wants to
sacrifice the family or an individual caregiver for the benefit of the person
with Alzheimer's disease."

   The search for a cure

   Research into Alzheimer's disease at McMaster University includes:

   Dr. Michel Rathbone

   Professor of Medicine

   Cells in the brain use a chemical called acetylcholine to communicate with
each other. In people with Alzheimer's, the chemical is depleted because
something called a precursor protein, which is a normal protein found in all
nerve cells, turns toxic.

   The result is that some nerve cells lose their ability to do certain
processes and then eventually die.

   While everybody has the protein in their blood, people with what's called the
E4 variation have an increased incidence of Alzheimer's.

   "It doesn't cause the disease but it predisposes you to it," Rathbone says.

   Rathbone's team has identified the healing powers of guanosine -- a chemical
which stimulates the growth of nerve cells.

   By giving more guanosine to people than is normally in their system, it is
possible to stimulate growth.

   Rathbone and NeoTherapeutics in California are doing clinical trials on a
drug called Neotrofin, which could improve the function of the brain's nerve
cells and slow the onslaught of Alzheimer's. Rathbone's research on guanosine
could also have a positive impact on spinal cord research.

   Dr. Laurie Doering

   Professor of Pathology and Molecular Medicine

   Brain stem cells have the ability to form all other types of cells in the
brain in the right conditions. Brain cells that die from Alzheimer's disease
could be repopulated by stem cells that will be able to produce acetylcholine,
the chemical that allows cells to communicate with each other.

   By using drugs or gene therapy, Doering may eventually be able to regenerate
those cells and thus slow the disease and possibly reverse the clinical symptoms
of Alzheimer's.

   Doering's research may also help to reverse the effects of Parkinson's
disease.

GRAPHIC: Photo: John Rennison, the Hamilton Spectator; McMaster researchers
Michel Rathbone, right, and his research associate and wife Pam Middlemiss are
involved in efforts aimed at reversing memory loss.

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2002


                              475 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                       May 9, 2000 Tuesday Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH & SCIENCE; Pg. D04

LENGTH: 646 words

HEADLINE: New genomics milestone; Sheds light on Down's syndrome

SOURCE: N.Y. Times News Service

BYLINE: Nicholas Wade

BODY:

   A team of principally Japanese and German scientists has reached another
milestone in the race to decode the human genome.

   It has essentially completed the DNA sequence of chromosome 21, a result that
sheds light on the workings of Down's syndrome.

   The team is part of the international consortium of academic centres led by
the National Institutes of Health and the Wellcome Trust of London. The
consortium has now completed two chromosomes, numbers 21 and 22, which are the
two shortest of the human complement of 23 pairs.

   Chromosome 21 is best known in the context of Down's syndrome. Affected
children are born with three copies of the chromosome instead of the usual two.
Usually a third chromosome is lethal because the extra doses of its genes
derange the carefully balanced economy of the cell.

   The decoded DNA sequence of chromosome 21, being published in this week's
Nature, explains why Down's syndrome children escape the usual death sentence,
although at a cost. The chromosome has extremely few genes -- a mere 225,
according to the consortium team's count, in its 33,827,477 decodable units of
DNA.

   Biologists who study Down's syndrome do not know whether there is a general
imbalance because of all the extra genes, or whether a handful of specific genes
underlies the 80 or so specific disorders of the syndrome. The decoding of
chromosome 21 at least establishes a catalog of all the relevant genes.

   "So defining the players and the playing field is a very major step that the
Down's syndrome community has been working toward for years," said Dr. Roger
Reeves, a geneticist at Johns Hopkins University who studies the syndrome.

   Identifying the genes, and when and where they operate, could lay the basis
for someday devising gene therapy for the syndrome, Reeves said.

   The consortium team estimates that if chromosomes 21 and 22 between them have
an average number of genes, the total number of human genes would be a mere
40,000. Other estimates range from 70,000 to 140,000.

   It may seem extraordinary that with the human genome so close to completion,
the estimates of its number of genes are all over the lot. But recognizing human
genes in the DNA sequence is a rapidly developing art.

   A bioinformatics company called DoubleTwist, of Oakland, Calif., said
yesterday that it had downloaded the consortium's human genome data, which at
present cover 80 per cent of the genome, and that with its own software it had
identified about 105,000 probable human genes.

   If the higher estimates of human genes are correct, the consortium teams that
analysed chromosomes 21 and 22 may seem to have been too conservative in its
gene count.

   The Japanese-German team decoded all of chromosome 21 except for the
centromere region, which cannot be tackled by present methods, and 10 small gaps
of particularly resistant sequence, which are being left for analysis later.

   In decoding chromosome 21, the consortium now leads 2-0 in the genome race
against its rival, the Celera Corp. of Rockville, Md. But the score is
misleading because Celera's strategy is to decode all the chromosomes in tandem,
and company officials say they are only weeks away from the goal.

   DoubleTwist's ability to survey the genome is evidence of the impressive
amounts of human DNA data the consortium has been putting into the public
database.

   The directors of the five leading sequencing centers said yesterday that they
had decoded 16 million units of DNA in overlapping segments that together
covered 85 per cent of the human genome. Their project is now moving into the
finishing phase, that of filling the remaining gaps.

   "From my point of view the race is over in that the vast majority of the
human genome sequence is freely available on the Web," said Dr. Eric Lander,
director of the genome sequencing center at the Whitehead Institute in
Cambridge, Mass.

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2002


                              480 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Sun Media Corporation
                                The Toronto Sun

                       May 7, 2000, Sunday, Final EDITION

SECTION: COMMENT, Pg. C5, NATIONAL AFFAIRS

LENGTH: 785 words

HEADLINE: A COMMONS MIX OF BS AND BIO-TECHNOLOGY

BYLINE: MARK BONOKOSKI

DATELINE: OTTAWA

BODY:


   The House of Commons, as friendly as any viper pit, has rules of conduct
which surely befuddle and bewilder the children whose school field trips find
them sitting in the public gallery.

   One can see it written on their faces.

   It is quite acceptable, for example, for a parliamentarian to stand in the
House and slander the good name of anyone in the land, yet totally unacceptable
for one of his adversaries to stand in response and rightfully name the MP a
liar.

   It is a confusing paradox.

   As long as an MP is in the safety of the House of Commons, he can say
virtually whatever he wants about anyone in public or private life - even
suggest, perchance, that a well-known TV personality might have an insincere
agenda, or an ulterior motive behind his stand on a particular issue which bears
investigation.

   A case in point.

   Judging by the biographical material available on world-renowned Canadian
scientist David Suzuki, one would have little trouble intellectually accepting
the fact that he is an expert on genetics, as well as a man of great principle
and honour.

   Yet, if one sat in on the debates in the Commons last week when the labelling
of genetically altered Frankenfood was on the discussion table, one might wonder
if there was a Dr. Suzuki, as well as a Mr. Hyde.

   Having spent 30 years in the RCMP, Canadian Alliance MP Howard Hilstrom
should know a thing or two about slandering and libelling. During his cop
career, he was involved in numerous investigations involving both commercial and
organized crime, leaving little doubt he has heard a few bad things said about
good people, and more than a few good things said about the bad.

   Heard it in court, heard it on the streets.

   As for genetically modified organics (GMO), Hilstrom's ownership of a beef
cattle ranch in his Manitoba riding of Selkirk-Interlake might suggest he would
not turn a deaf ear toward this sort of burgeoning science - not if it can speed
cattle growth, cut down on disease, cheapen the price of crops and fodder, etc.

   So let's take that as a given.

   Nonetheless, what Hilstrom said in the House of Commons about Suzuki last
week was somewhat startling, especially since it managed to escape notice.

   What Hilstrom did, in fact, was accuse Suzuki of possibly being against GMOs,
not because of any scientific evidence, but to advance his own financial gain.

   "I wonder about fellows like David Suzuki, who is really a media
personality," said Hilstrom, "although it says on his resume that he has a bit
of a background in genetics.

   "When he makes his arguments, how many times does he actually come up with
scientific research, or points out that it is accepted by the scientific
community?" he asked. "Being media personalities, I know these (people) are paid
big salaries, in millions of dollars.

   "In Mr. Suzuki's case (though), I wonder if he has some investments in the
non-GMO companies and he thinks he can help them along if he could help kill off
the GMO industry.

   "We have to look at the background on this."

   So, there it is - his accusations protected by Parliamentary privilege
because they were said in the House of Commons, and acceptable to repeat here
because the same protection is offered for the very same reason.

   Hilstrom's point that Suzuki has "a bit of a background in genetics." A bit?
If a "bit" is having a doctorate in genetics, more than 15 high-ranking
professional honours, 14 honourary degrees, more than a half-dozen books to his
credit as well as the same number or more of both television and radio
documentaries, then a bit it is.

   But that is not the definition of a bit.

   It is like saying Wayne Gretzky knows a bit about hockey, or that bears know
a bit about the woods.

   This is not to say, however, that Howard Hilstrom did not have legitimate
points when it came to supporting GMO products and downplaying demand for
expensive labelling which could, in fact, take away affordability of Third World
countries to purchase potentially cheaper food.

   There was legitimacy, too, when he cited how bio-technology has developed,
among others, a high-vitamin rice which has reduced child blindness, vaccine for
viruses, gene therapy for hereditary disorders, better non-toxic weed controls
and faster reforestation methods.

   So not everything bio-tech should be condemned willy-nilly as Frankenstuff.

   Why Hilstrom decided to particularly lash out at Suzuki in such a personal
manner, however, remains a bit of a puzzle, especially when he can be accused of
the very same thing he accused Suzuki of doing - which is not presenting any
evidence to back his position.

   Maybe it was something he ate.

   It's the only possible explanation.

LOAD-DATE: May 9, 2000


                              482 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                        May 1, 2000 Monday Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH & SCIENCE; Pg. C14

LENGTH: 415 words

HEADLINE: Treatment may free kids from plastic bubbles

SOURCE: The Spectator

BODY:

   The report from France that several infants with severe immune disorders have
apparently been cured by gene therapy is a dramatic breakthrough in a field that
is desperate for one.

   Comment: Gene therapy breakthrough

   Three children whose immune systems were not functioning because of a
defective gene and who had been forced to live in airtight bubbles to avoid the
risk of infection have been restored to normal, healthy lives.

   This is the kind of medical miracle that gene therapy has been promising for
a decade but has never been able to deliver.

   The treatment involved removing bone marrow from the infants, isolating the
so-called stem cells, inserting normal genes to replace the defective ones, and
then reinfusing the stem cells into the blood stream, where they were finally
able to generate the cells for a functioning immune system. Two of the infants
have been healthy for almost a year. Without this treatment, they would have
been living in sterile bubbles until they could receive an alternative treatment
-- a transplant of bone marrow from a healthy donor -- that has a limited
success rate.

   Caveats are in order. Only a small number of children have been helped so
far, and even they have been monitored for less than a year. At this point the
researchers do not know whether their new immune systems will continue
functioning well or will start to deteriorate. Nor is it clear that gene therapy
will work as well on a wider array of diseases where experiments are under way.
The immune deficiency tackled by the French -- known as severe combined
immunodeficiency, type X1, or SCID-X1 -- was deemed a particularly ripe target
for gene therapy. Other diseases may be more difficult.

   The French success comes after a decade of hope, hype and recklessness in
which gene therapists repeatedly implied that they were on the verge of
delivering medical miracles only to have their attempts end in failure or death.

   But these latest attempts in France seem to have been a model of care and
caution. The researchers experimented for six years in mice and the laboratory
before attempting to treat humans, and they took advantage of incremental
technical advances made over the years by other scientists to achieve their
success. Their accomplishment could serve as a model for the fast-moving
revolution in human genetics. The field shows great promise but will require
dedicated, painstaking work and careful monitoring to reach its goals.

   -- The New York Times

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2002


                              484 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                      April 28, 2000 Friday Final Edition

SECTION: CANADA & WORLD; Pg. C04

LENGTH: 775 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy first; Creating perfect copies saves immune-deficient
babies

SOURCE: N.Y. Times News Service

BYLINE: Gina Kolata

DATELINE: NEW YORK

BODY:

   Scientists have successfully used gene therapy to save the lives of several
infants who might otherwise have died of a severe immune disorder.

   Researchers said the achievement, announced yesterday, was the first
unequivocal success for gene therapy, a field whose widely heralded promise has
until now ended in disappointing results.

   The work involved three babies who could not grow complete immune systems.
The only other treatment for the condition, a form of severe combined immune
deficiency, is a bone marrow transplant, which works just 60 per cent of the
time. Otherwise, patients must live in germ-free bubbles or fall prey to the
ever-present microorganisms that most people easily fend off.

   Health and Science: F10

   In a report of the work, to be released in today's issue of the journal
Science, Dr. Alain Fischer, a professor of pediatric immunology at the Hospital
Necker-Enfants Malades in Paris and his colleagues describe the course of two of
the babies, ages 11 months and 8 months at the time of treatment.

   Three months after their gene therapy, the researchers recounted, the babies
were home from the hospital, living like any other children. Ten months later,
their immune systems were normal. Ordinarily, infants born with SCID (pronounced
like skid), die before their first birthdays unless they remain in a germ-free
environments.

   In a footnote, the researchers said they had successfully treated a third
baby, who was a month old at the time. In a telephone interview, Fischer said he
had since treated two more babies and was waiting to learn whether the effort
succeeded with them as well.

   "We are very happy and the families are very happy," Fischer said. "It is a
success today. Then the next question is, 'How long will it be a success?' It
may be that after some time there will be a decline in these cells and that
sooner or later we will have to treat them again. We hope that if this happens
it will not be for a very long time."

   Gene therapy experts were exuberant.

   "It's a very exciting study," said Dr. R. Michael Blaese, who was a member of
a medical team at the National Institutes of Health that attempted the first
gene therapy on a human patient nearly 10 years ago.

   Blaese, now the head of the human therapeutics division at ValiGen in
Newtown, Pa., added: "This would probably be the first example in any disease
where gene therapy could be a fully successful treatment. You can't distinguish
these patients from normal."

   The success comes after a tumultuous decade in which, according to the
National Institutes of Health, more than 390 gene therapy studies were
initiated, involving more than 4,000 patients and more than a dozen medical
conditions.

   While those doing the research always expressed confidence in its promise,
critics said many of the companies formed to capitalize on the technology
exaggerated preliminary data in hopes of raising capital.

   And, at times, some scientists promised more than the technology was ready to
deliver, leaving the field a target for accusations that patients were being
endangered by reckless experiments that were doomed to failure.

   The babies treated by Fischer had a rare disorder known as severe combined
immunodeficiency-X1, or SCID-X1, which almost exclusively affects boys,
occurring once in every 75,000 live male births. It is caused by mutations that
destroy the function of a gene that is needed to make T cells, a class of white
blood cells.

   In a sense, the condition is a perfect target for gene therapy. With scid-X1,
the cells that need a new gene are readily accessible in the bone marrow, which
is relatively easy to remove from the body.

   Even better, if functioning genes actually get into the marrow cells of
patients with SCID-X1, those genetically corrected cells will proliferate and
displace cells with the defective gene. That is because, as the body tries to
grow a complete immune system, it sends waves of chemical signals to the bone
marrow to stimulate it into providing T cells. T cells with the defective gene
start to grow and then die.

   Any cells with a functioning gene will be fuelled by the body's hormones and
will grow rapidly to populate the bone marrow.

   Fischer said he began working on gene therapy for SCID-X1 in 1993, as soon as
the missing gene was identified.

   He studied the treatment in mice and in the laboratory, attempting to insert
the gene into patients' cells for six years before trying to treat patients.

   Last year, he said, he decided "there was a serious chance that the treatment
could work in this particular disease," and the success with the first babies
was the result.

GRAPHIC: Photo: Activating the immune system:Gene therapy

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2002


                              489 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                      April 18, 2000 Tuesday Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH & SCIENCE; Pg. C04

LENGTH: 329 words

HEADLINE: Royal Society seeks new mandate for millennium

SOURCE: Torstar News Service

BYLINE: Peter Calamai

DATELINE: OTTAWA

BODY:

   Unpacked file boxes are piled waist-high, the boardroom lacks a proper table
and the Web site seriously needs updating.

   Still, the Royal Society of Canada is in new offices and eager to launch a
new phase of its 117-year existence -- as a national oracle on science and
technology.

   If the little-known but venerable society makes this jump, it will end a
troubled relationship with the federal government and join the mainstream ranks
of august national academies in the United States, Britain and France.

   Canadians would gain a source of independent expert advice about some of
society's hottest issues, such as human gene therapy and cloning.

   The advice would come from panels of experts assembled by the Royal Society
at the request of the federal government -- but without prior government access
to their reports.

   "It takes courage for a government to do this because they don't have any
say. But they gain credibility because the advice comes from an entirely
independent group," said William Leiss, the University of Calgary professor who
is president of the Royal Society.

   Relations soured during the 1990s between the Royal Society and the
government and its funding was cut.

   Modeled on the French academies when founded in 1883, the Society elects
members on the basis of excellence in scholarship in the arts, humanities and
science. Its 1,500 fellows are predominately academics, overwhelmingly male and
mostly 50 or older.

   Experts recruited by the society pronounced last year on health risks from
cellphones (minor and manageable). Other panels are busily probing the future of
genetically engineered food and the current cost-benefit assumptions about air
pollution at the government's request. The Society is asking the federal
government to formalize this ad hoc relationship and pay $1.5 million annually
for the cost of running it.

   The British, French and Swedish governments all help support their national
academies financially.

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2002


                              492 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                     April 15, 2000 Saturday Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A12

LENGTH: 158 words

HEADLINE: McMaster scientists part of elite research team

SOURCE: The Hamilton Spectator

BYLINE: Laura Cassiani

BODY:

   Leading McMaster scientists will be among a group of elite Canadian
researchers who will head up a federally funded network to study preventative
vaccines for cancer, AIDS and other viral diseases.

   Dr. Ken Rosenthal and Dr. Jack Gauldie of the health sciences faculty at Mac
will be key researchers with the newly formed Canadian Network Vaccines and
Immunotherapeutics of Cancer and Chronic Viral Diseases (CANVAC). The federal
government has promised to invest $18.8 million over the next four years.

   Gauldie and Rosenthal were in Montreal yesterday at the Network's
headquarters for the official launch. They will join 67 leading researchers from
13 Canadian universities.

   Rosenthal is a professor of pathology and his research involves human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infections and AIDS. Gauldie is the chair of the
department of pathology and molecular medicine and is also co-ordinator of Mac's
centre for gene therapeutics.

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2002


                              495 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                      April 6, 2000 Thursday Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 704 words

HEADLINE: What the doc ordered; May be the tonic for cancer centre

SOURCE: The Spectator

BODY:

   Despite all the moaning about having to relocate the Hamilton Regional Cancer
Centre, you have to wonder how many of the tears being shed are of the crocodile
variety.

   Nobody will say it publicly, of course, but moving the centre from Henderson
may be just what the doctor ordered.

   Health care sources and documents obtained by The Hamilton Spectator suggest
that some of the powers that be believe there are strong advantages to making a
fresh start elsewhere.

   Those benefits include leapfrogging an existing shortage of space for drug
therapy treatment, a closer tie-in with academic cancer research, and more room
for future expansion.

   In other words, some feel the proposed downsizing of Henderson may be as much
an opportunity as a crisis -- one the centre is quite willing to use as leverage
to build up its cancer services.

   But the downside is steep.

   Relocating the centre would require an estimated $100-million capital
investment, of which some $45 million has already been approved for the
now-delayed expansion at the Henderson site.

   That's going to be a hard sell to the public.

   That's why it's perhaps more than a little convenient that the decision to
move may be forced on Cancer Care Ontario by the Hamilton Health Sciences
Corporation's operating plan and the Ministry of Health's deficit-busting
operational review.

   If the ministry allows HHSC to go ahead with its plans to scale back the
Henderson, the cancer centre says it will have to relocate because it needs full
acute services for its patients.

   That means building at either McMaster University Medical Centre, Hamilton
General Hospital or St. Joseph's Hospital.

   Although a preferred site hasn't been identified, nobody seems particularly
broken up by the prospect of losing Henderson as the host hospital.

   Part of the reason for that is the delayed $45 million expansion of radiation
bunkers at the existing centre does not address an emerging shortfall in space
for systemic therapeutics, of which the most common is chemotherapy.

   The expansion plans, which are on hold until the Henderson's fate is decided,
were predicated on the need for more radiation therapy.

   In the last 18 months or so, however, the centre has seen a consistent
increase in the need for chemotherapy.

   Some feel Henderson could accommodate the shortfall if a plan was developed.

   But others say a new centre would not only answer the need for more space for
that kind of treatment, but would also allow for greater expansion down the
road, something the Henderson site falls short on.

   The thinking here is, given the aging population, the cancer problem is only
likely to get bigger over the next couple of decades. So if Henderson can't
handle expansion, which site can?

   According to documents, land availability at St. Joe's is uncertain and
expansion possibilities range from zero to limited.

   On the other hand, the General, which has acquired a significant parcel of
surrounding land, has almost an unlimited capacity for growth.

   Room at McMaster is much more limited. But the benefit there is the
opportunity for increased interaction with university-based medicine, including
the obvious linkage to Dr. Jack Gauldie's leading-edge centre for gene therapy
and immune modulation.

   A marriage with McMaster will not only be a wedding of cancer treatment with
cancer research. It will also be one of supreme convenience for increased
university involvement.

   But convenience isn't going to be enough to satisfy the public. It needs to
hear a good business case for the move.

   It needs to hear why a $41 million centre that was completed just eight years
ago is now expendable.

   It needs to be told exactly why the centre needs to be berthed with a
full-service acute care hospital.

   It needs to be shown why, even if the Henderson is downsized, the centre
can't rely on shuttle services to the city's other acute hospitals.

   Above all, it needs to be convinced that the cancer centre and Cancer Care
Ontario are focusing on patient care, not buildings and infrastructure.

   Andrew Dreschel's commentary usually appears in The Spectator Monday,
Wednesday and Friday.

   Phone 526-3495. E-mail: adreschel @hamiltonspectator.com.

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2002


                              499 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Sun Media Corporation
                         Edmonton Sun (Alberta, Canada)

                      April 2, 2000, Sunday, Final EDITION

SECTION: SUNDAY, Pg. SE4

LENGTH: 1629 words

HEADLINE: WHAT THE FUTURE MAY HOLD SEA CREATURES ON MOON OF JUPITER; GENE
THERAPY SOLVES DISEASE WOES

BYLINE: DAVID QUIGLEY, EDMONTON SUN

BODY:


   Sea creatures are discovered on a distant moon, gene therapy eradicates
disease and parents plan for their children like ordering a new car.

   These and other startling visions of the future from 30 of the world's
greatest thinkers is the focus of Predictions, a just-published 328-page peek at
the next century.

   Arthur C. Clarke, the science-fiction writer best known for his book 2001: A
Space Odyssey, predicts life will be found on one of Jupiter's 16 moons.

   "Life beneath the ice-covered oceans of Jupiter's moon Europa will appear
increasingly likely and before the century is halfway through large marine
creatures will be discovered when the first robot probes drill through Europa's
ice, revealing an entire new biota,'' Clarke writes.

   A native Brit who's lived in Sri Lanka for almost 50 years, Clarke is widely
credited with being the father of satellite communications based on his 1945
article published in Wireless World.

   In the paper, Clarke details the idea of space stations circling the Earth at
a distance of 36,000 km in geostationary orbits to act as radio wave
transmitters.

   Clarke is modest about his far-sightedness.

   "If I hadn't written that paper ... 10 people would have done it the next
year, you see,'' Clarke says in his profile - a mix of interview and biography
which precedes each contributor's predictions.

   "I may have accelerated the conquest of space by 15 minutes of so,'' he
reluctantly concedes.

   By 2015, Clarke says, Prince Harry will become the first member of the Royal
Family to travel in space on an aerospace plane.

   "He may even stop off at the Hilton Orbiter hotel, assembled out of the giant
tanks from the shuttle spacecraft (America's spacecraft of the 1980s), which had
previously been allowed to fall back to Earth.''

   After 2020, artificial intelligences, which have reached human levels, will
be launched towards the nearer stars and a year later the first humans will land
on Mars.

   In 2057, the centennial of the first artificial satellite launched by the
Soviets - Sputnik 1 - will be celebrated by humans "not only on Earth, but on
the Moon, Mars, Jupiter's moons Europa and Ganymede and on Saturn's largest moon
Titan - as well as in orbit around Venus, Neptune, and Pluto.''

   At the close of the 21st century, a new propulsion system "reacting against
the structure of space time'' will make the space rocket obsolete and allow for
speeds close to that of light.

   "The first explorers will set off to nearby star systems that robot probes
have already found promising and then history will truly begin,'' forecasts
Clarke.

   French Anderson, director of gene therapy at the University of Southern
California, predicts a world where genetics battle illness.

   "Once a defective or poorly functioning gene is discovered, we will have the
ability to give a patient a more effective gene to replace the 'weak' one (gene
therapy) or, if the gene is making a normal product but just too much of too
little of it, a drug that can increase or decrease production from that gene.

   "By the year 2030 I anticipate that there will be a gene-based treatment for
every disease,'' says Anderson.

   But he acknowledges that giving people genes for reasons other than treating
disease poses a massive threat to society.

   "I fear that the downside of this powerful technology might be that eugenics
will be practised on a scale far larger than any 'selective breeding' policy
could accomplish.''

   Paul Davies, a popular science writer and physicist, hopes to see the
solution this century of at least one of the great outstanding 'origin'
mysteries: the origin of the universe, the origin of life and the origin of
human consciousness.

   While future astronomical discoveries will deepen understanding of the early
universe "the originating cosmic event itself may lie forever beyond the scope
of empirical inquiry,'' says Davies.

   It's more likely that scientists will produce synthetic life. So-called
"designer bioforms" might take the form of microbes that can thrive on hostile
plants or bacteria to clean up chemical or nuclear waste.

   Creating life in a laboratory, scientists will study the principles that
transform chemicals into living cells.

   That research would be overshadowed if life is found on another planet in the
solar system. Such a discovery "would point to a universe teeming with
biological organisms and offer the prospect of other intelligent beings
inhabiting Earth-like planets in the galaxy,'' says Davies.

   And piecing together the puzzle of human consciousness may have to wait until
then.

   Exclaims Davies: "Of course, if we discover advanced life in another part of
the galaxy, the aliens may simply supply us with all the answers in one go!''

   Richard Dawkins, a British biologist and science writer, sees the human
consciousness conundrum cleared up in the next 100 years.

   "I believe that during the 21st century the ancient philosophical mind-body
problem will be solved, and solved not by philosophers but by scientists.''

   American philosopher Daniel Dennett ascribes to Dawkins' concept of memes -
ideas, fashions, behaviours and skills passed on from person to person by
imitation.

   Dennett says that the explosion of communication technology in the 21st
century, coupled with dawning reality of education's critical importance, will
spawn tumult.

   "All the flotsam and jetsam of popular culture, all the trash and scum that
accumulates in the corners of a free society, will inundate these relatively
pristine regions,'' says Dennett.

   "In the next century it will be our memes, both tonic and toxic, that will
wreak havoc on the unprepared world.''

   Carl Djerassi, who changed the world by developing the oral contraceptive
known simply as "the pill,'' predicts women will continue using his invention in
the new century.

   But it may lose its most-favoured status as a birth-control method. Research
on the accurate detection of female fertility could make the rhythm technique of
contraception more reliable. A pill for men is less likely.

   Rad-fem Andrea Dworkin offers a list of demands instead of predictions, save
her foreseeing "deeper and more massive resistance from women'' in the next 100
years.

   "I want women to conquer the fear of male punishment; if that means the use
of strategic violence, so be it.''

   Francis Fukuyama, a professor of public policy at George Mason University,
predicts globalization and the political legacy from feminism will mean fewer
wars.

   "Let's face it, most of the trouble in the world is caused by young men, or
else Saddam Hussein types who want to lead young men into various kinds of
adventures,'' says Fukuyama, who also believes commercial competition will usurp
warfare as a vehicle for developing new technologies.

   Economist John Kenneth Galbraith emerged from southern Ontario to become a
czar of American economics, his 1958 book The Affluent Society sealing that
reputation.

   Galbraith, who toured India with Jackie Onassis, says the world cannot afford
to ignore the plight of people under the heels of cruel and incompetent
governments.

   "In the years ahead there must be a procedure by which a strengthened United
Nations suspends sovereignty in countries whose governments are destroying their
people,'' says Galbraith.

   He also blasts the International Monetary Fund for bailing out bankers and
business executives "at the expense of workers and the large public.''

   At age 90, Galbraith says nuclear annihilation of the planet "awaits only the
authority of some insane politician or his or her military delegates.''

   Scientist and prolific writer Stephen Jay Gould, in his typically grumpy
manner, refuses to forecast the future, calling it a mug's game.

   "Even to anticipate a single scientific breakthrough in the next century and
then to speculate about its implications for human life carries out hopes for
prophecy too far,'' says the Harvard geology professor.

   Gould revolutionized the study of evolution in 1972 by theorizing that
species stayed the same for eons before undergoing a developmental burst and
forming new species. At the time, most scientists believed evolutionary changes
happened slowly over long periods of time.

   Susan Greenfield, a professor of synaptic pharmacology at Oxford, envisions
the next century will see people "monitored and manipulated'' from the ground
floor up.

   "It may therefore turn out that 2084 is a much more accurate prediction of
the 1984 scenario than that original date,'' she says.

   Industrial designer Donald Norman, author of the best-selling book The
Psychology of Everyday Things, says future parents will plan for a baby the same
way they order a new car, with a variety of options: hair colour, bone structure
and cognitive abilities.

   Sherwood Rowland, co-recipient of the 1995 Nobel prize for chemistry for
alerting the world to the fact that chloroflurocarbons were destroying the
ozone, says energy production in 2100 will still depend on fossil fuels.

   "To mitigate the climatic fallout from greenhouse gas emissions,
'sequestration' or trapping carbon dioxide "will be a near universal industrial
practice.''

   American feminist literary critic Elaine Showalter, while expecting ovarian
cancer to be cured in this century, is less optimistic about treating the mind.

   "The 21st century will also bring new paranoias, new hysterias, new
conspiracy theories and new imaginary illnesses; and if history is a guide women
will be the majority of believers and sufferers.''

   Predictions, edited by Sian Griffith, features editor of the Times Higher
Education Supplement, was published March 31 by Oxford University Press
(hardcover $ 24.95) and includes black and white photographs of each
contributor.

GRAPHIC: 1. Book Cover 2. photo from Sun Files A view of Earth from space.  3.
photo from Sun Files Arthur C. Clarke, noted science-fiction writer, predicts
robot probes will drill through the ice on the seas of Europa, one of Jupiter's
moons, and discover life.  4. photo from Sun Files John Kenneth Galbraith says a
stronger United Nations will be needed.

LOAD-DATE: April 8, 2000


                              506 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Sun Media Corporation
                         Edmonton Sun (Alberta, Canada)

                     March 17, 2000, Friday, Final EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 58

LENGTH: 233 words

HEADLINE: ISOTECHNIKA STOCKS PUMMELLED

BYLINE: TIMOTHY LE RICHE, EDMONTON SUN

BODY:


   The human genome controversy sent Isotechnika Inc.'s shares into a $ 1.25
tailspin, the company said.

   As a result, drug maker Isotechnika clarified yesterday that it is not
involved with gene therapy.

   Edmonton-based Isotechnika said a declaration by U.S. President Bill Clinton
and British Prime Minister Tony Blair put the bite on its stock prices.

   Clinton and Blair said in a joint statement earlier this week that the human
genome, currently being mapped out in a worldwide scientific race, should be
public information and not be protected by patents.

   Robert Foster, Isotechnika chairman and CEO, said the statement nailed
biotech stocks on the NASDAQ and other markets like the Canadian Venture
Exchange.

   Isotechnika shares hit a 52-week high of $ 4.60 each Wednesday but dropped as
low as $ 3.35 yesterday, before closing at $ 3.65.

   "Everything was ratcheting down, right across the board," said Foster. "We
thought, gosh, we're not even in gene therapy, so what's with that?"

   Isotechnika issued a release yesterday clarifying that its lead product,
which fights organ rejection in transplants, is based on organic chemistry, not
genes.

   The company's stocks were on the rebound yesterday, said Foster.

   "It's actually recovering quite nicely," said Foster.

   Isotechnika recently received regulatory approval to begin clinical trials on
its lead product, ISAtx247.

LOAD-DATE: March 17, 2000


                              511 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                       March 3, 2000 Friday Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH & SCIENCE; Pg. C08

LENGTH: 267 words

HEADLINE: How gene therapy is administered key to safe trial

SOURCE: Knight Ridder Newspapers

BYLINE: Huntly Collins

BODY:

   The safety of gene therapy has come under intense scrutiny by federal
agencies, Congress and the scientific community since a teenager died last fall
in a gene-therapy trial at the University of Pennsylvania.

   The death is believed to be the first to stem directly from gene therapy
rather than the patient's underlying disease. Does the gene-therapy trial for
hemophilia B, led by researchers at Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, pose
the same safety concerns? No, according to gene-therapy experts, who cite two
main reasons. First, the Children's trial uses an adeno-associated virus as a
delivery vehicle to get the needed gene into cells. The virus causes no known
human disease.

   By contrast, the Penn trial used adenovirus, which comes from a different
viral family than adeno-associated virus. In its natural state, adenovirus can
cause something as innocuous as the common cold -- or as life-threatening as
pneumonia.

   Second, the Children's researchers are shooting their viral vector into
patients' thigh muscles, where it is not likely to spill into the bloodstream.

   By contrast, the Penn scientists shot their vector into the main artery to
the liver, where the genetically altered viruses had a greater chance of
entering the circulatory system and affecting other organs such as the lungs.

   In an editorial that accompanied the study, the journal Nature Genetics said
Children's hemophilia B trial was "exemplary" because it exposed trial
volunteers to few risks while offering them a clear benefit -- the possibility
of reducing their use of artificial blood-clotting factor.

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2002


                              512 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                       March 3, 2000 Friday Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH & SCIENCE; Pg. C08

LENGTH: 827 words

HEADLINE: New hope for hemophiliacs; Promising gene therapy could improve their
lives

SOURCE: Knight Ridder Newspapers

BYLINE: Huntly Collins

DATELINE: PHILADELPHIA

BODY:

   A team of scientists led by researchers at Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia have reported that two of three people with severe hemophilia
showed measurable improvement after being injected with a gene to correct their
bleeding disorder.

   The report is regarded as one of the most promising developments in a decade
of human gene-therapy experiments .

   While the patients are far from cured, a one-time infusion of the gene for
the blood-clotting protein known as factor IX has allowed the patients to begin
producing low levels of their own clotting factor and to dramatically reduce
their reliance on artificial factor, one by 50 per cent and another by 80 per
cent.

   Not enough time has passed since the start of the trial last June to
determine whether the third patient will also be able to reduce his use of
artificial factor, scientists said.

   Currently, people who suffer from hemophilia B, the less common form of
hemophilia, must undergo weekly intravenous injections of factor IX to prevent
life-threatening bleeding episodes. The medicine is inconvenient and expensive,
costing from $50,000 to $100,000 a year. Gene therapy, by contrast, holds out
the promise of correcting the genetic defect that causes the protein deficiency,
allowing people to produce their own factor IX.

   Katherine A. High, a Children's Hospital hematology expert who led the
research effort, said the results were cause for "cautious optimism" that gene
therapy might turn severe hemophilia B into a milder form of the disease. The
preliminary findings, she said, do not constitute evidence of a cure, although
that is the hope as scientists continue to slowly increase the doses of the gene
drug in the ongoing trial.

   If the therapy pans out, it could dramatically improve the quality of life
for people who suffer from hemophilia B, said Catherine S. Manno, a pediatrician
at Children's and principal investigator for the trial. "The cost in dollars
would also be considerably less," she said.

   The findings, announced in Nature Genetics, offer the first encouraging news
about gene therapy since last fall, when the scientific field was rocked by the
death of a teenager enrolled in a gene-therapy trial at the University of
Pennsylvania.

   Savio Woo, a gene-therapy expert at Mount Sinai Hospital in New York and
president of the American Society for Gene Therapy, called Wednesday's report "a
milestone" in gene-therapy research.

   Jeanne Lusher, a hematologist at Children's Hospital in Detroit and chief
medical adviser to the National Hemophilia Foundation, said the findings would
have to be demonstrated in much larger numbers of people and show greater
increases in the production of factor IX in order to hold up.

   "But the fact that they are getting reductions in bleeding and some increase
in factor IX is really very exciting," Lusher said. "All of us in the hemophilia
community believe that the best hope for a cure is through gene therapy."

   Normally, scientific findings that are as preliminary as those reported by
High are not published in peer-reviewed journals.

   But in an editorial, Nature Genetics said it was publishing the study because
of its unexpected outcome: Even at very low doses, the gene drug showed "modest
evidence" of effectiveness with no side effects. The trial was only designed to
test the safety of the approach and was not expected to show any evidence of
effectiveness until much higher doses of the gene drug were given to patients.

   An estimated 5,000 American boys and men suffer from hemophilia B, which
stems from mutations in the gene that controls the body's production of factor
IX. A different gene is involved in hemophilia A, which affects about 25,000
Americans, most of them males. Both forms are usually inherited, but can also
result from spontaneous mutations of the genes.

   High's team is in the early stages of research on gene therapy for hemophilia
A, a much more difficult challenge. The three patients cited in the paper are
the first of nine hemophilia B sufferers in the preliminary safety trial. They
received the lowest dose of the gene drug. The next group of three will get a
medium dose, and the last group will get a high dose. The trial will not be
completed until year's end -- and an additional several years will be required
for even larger human trials, High said.

   "We are always concerned about raising false hope," said Arthur Beaudet, a
geneticist at Baylor College of Medicine. "But the paper suggests that a
successful gene-therapy treatment for hemophilia will be a year or two away, not
five years as we had previously thought."

   High said the scientific team -- including researchers at Stanford University
and the University of Pittsburgh -- was so surprised that the therapy appeared
to be working in the first patient that researchers asked other laboratories to
check and recheck the data. The results held up, she said, and continue to do so
nine months later.

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2002


                              513 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Sun Media Corporation
                                The Toronto Sun

                      March 3, 2000, Friday, Final EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. 5

LENGTH: 324 words

HEADLINE: COLD VIRUS TO FIGHT CANCER? T.O. SCIENTISTS DEVELOPING GENE-THERAPY
TREATMENT

BYLINE: SHARON LEM, TORONTO SUN

BODY:


   You wouldn't expect the common cold could be used to fight cancer, but
Toronto scientists are banking on it.

   Eighty percent of women who develop ovarian cancer have an abnormal gene
called the p53 gene.

   Its normal function is to stop tumours from growing, but when it becomes
defective, cells can grow into cancerous tumours.

   In a worldwide study with a test centre at the Toronto-Sunnybrook Regional
Cancer Centre, scientists are working on a way to insert the normal p53 gene
into women who have the defective gene.

   'INFECTING CELLS'

   It's hoped that when you replace the defective one with a good one, the
cancer cells will stop growing.

   The scientists want to use the common cold virus as a taxi to carry the good
gene to infect the patient's cancer sites.

   "The cold virus is good at infecting cells; it's not a particularly dangerous
virus and not associated with a lot of sickness," said gynecological oncologist
Dr. Al Covens, who is leading the Toronto part of the study.

   "This study is at the forefront of cutting-edge gene-therapy medicine and
it's been quite an accomplishment to get this far," Covens said. "Hopefully, it
will translate into better survival and it won't be a bust."

   MOST DEADLY FORMS

   Patients in the test group will receive the standard treatment for ovarian
cancer, which includes surgical removal of the tumour followed by chemotherapy.
However, while half of the group will follow the regular treatment path, the
other half will receive the good p53 gene by the cold virus called adenovirus,
in addition to surgery and chemotherapy.

   The treatment phase of the clinical trial is slated to last about four months
with regular updates for the rest of the patient's life.

   Ovarian cancer is usually detected at a late stage, making it one of the most
deadly forms of cancer. In Canada, almost 2,500 women are diagnosed each year
with ovarian cancer and 1,400 die from this disease.

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 2000


                              514 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Sun Media Corporation
                         Edmonton Sun (Alberta, Canada)

                    February 27, 2000, Sunday, Final EDITION

SECTION: SUNDAY, Pg. SE16

LENGTH: 210 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY TOUTED IN DISEASE TREATMENT

BYLINE: CP

DATELINE: TORONTO

BODY:


   Is gene therapy as revolutionary as it's cracked up to be?

   Could it be used to treat cancer? To breathe new life into a disease- ravaged
heart? Could designer genes be used to produce made-to-order babies?

   Not so fast, warns the scientific community. While great medical leaps are
being made in our knowledge of the human genetic makeup, we are still in the
infancy of a promising new era - an era that will see trial and error, hope and
despair.

   As researchers inch closer to completing the Human Genome Project - an
international collaborative effort to identify and sequence the almost 100, 000
human genes - the world holds its breath and wonders: "What will this mean for
the human race?"

   Linking particular genes to diseases will offer researchers a wealth of
information that should further scientists' knowledge of gene therapy.

   Ultimately, gene therapy will play a major role in treating a number of
diseases which are both inherited and acquired, says Dr. Keith Stewart, director
of the cancer gene therapy program at Princess Margaret Hospital.

   "It's really too soon to say, but I suspect, in the next decade or two it
will play a major role in human medicine," says Stewart, an associate professor
at the University of Toronto.

LOAD-DATE: February 27, 2000


                              515 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                    February 26, 2000 Saturday Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 956 words

HEADLINE: Province rejects Mohawk College cash plea

SOURCE: The Spectator

BYLINE: Carolynne Wheeler; Education Reporter

BODY:

   Mohawk College may be forced to close programs or turn students away after
being shut out of provincial funding to expand colleges and universities.

   Just over $22 million in funding announced yesterday by Dianne Cunningham,
minister of colleges and universities, will go only to McMaster University for
two expansion and renovation projects.

   Colleges and universities across the province are bracing for an increase in
enrolment of about 88,000 students over the next five years, as children of the
baby boomers finish high school.

   The sharpest enrolment peak will come in 2003 when the end of the fifth year
of high school will produce a double graduating class.

   While McMaster University will be able to accommodate its anticipated
increase of 2,800 students, there is no room for the 2,000 extra students Mohawk
expects.

   "All of the stats, including government statistics, show that Mohawk needs to
grow by 18 per cent. We've met all of the criteria in respect to performance and
I think outperformed a lot of our competitors," said college president Catherine
Rellinger.

   "It's early days to be talking contingency.

   "We're still confident that these initiatives will be supported."

   But she said the college cannot raise enough money on its own to expand
sufficiently to meet the additional expected demand.

   "These (extra) students will have to leave Hamilton and go somewhere else. Or
we need to consolidate some programs and give up something that we've put a lot
of effort into, in respect to allocating those resources to other priorities.
It's a no-win for the region."

   Hamilton's experience was the opposite of colleges in the Greater Toronto
Area, which took home half the grants announced.

   At McMaster, provost and vice-president academic Harvey Weingarten was
careful not to dwell on the $25 million in projects which were rejected, instead
thanking the minister for the $22.5 million the university received.

   "There is no student at McMaster who will not benefit," he said.

   The university will receive $18.53 million to renovate science, health
sciences and engineering space to create 22 classrooms and 48 new teaching and
research labs, to add 1,653 new student spaces.

   Another $4 million will expand business and arts facilities, adding 26
classrooms and labs and extra seminar and project rooms, to handle an increase
of 1,146 students.

   The two projects denied included a life and health sciences annex with 34
classrooms and labs, which would have also become home to the Centre for Gene
Therapy and Immune Modulation.

   The centre, which studies gene-based therapies for cancer, has been rejected
before in its search for funding to build a home. The last rejection came from
the Canadian Foundation for Innovation.

   The second McMaster project turned down was a submission with Mohawk that
would have expanded the nursing program at the new joint Institute for Applied
Health Sciences scheduled to open this fall.

   The two schools are already developing a joint bachelor's degree to prepare
for new provincial requirements taking effect in 2005.

   Rellinger said local programs train about 15 per cent of Ontario nurses and
are already full. Demand is expected to increase dramatically as thousands of
nurses retire over the next five years. The project would have added space for
1,100 more nursing students.

   Mohawk's second submission sought $10 million for a Centre for Excellence in
Information Technology, which would have added room for 2,176 students.

   Hamilton's grant caps four similar announcements in other areas this week.
Colleges and universities in the Greater Toronto Area - including Sheridan
College in Oakville -- received $330 million, enough to create space for another
26,000 students.

   Grants in other areas were more modest, but still higher than Hamilton's: $47
million in Ottawa, $51 million in London, $45 million in Guelph, $37 million in
Waterloo, and $30 million in Northern Ontario including Sudbury, North Bay,
Timmins and Thunder Bay.

   Brock University in St. Catharines also had its proposals rejected.

   In total, $742 million will be awarded this year to 35 institutions, all
chosen based on the number of new student spaces created, the amount of private
sector funding committed, demand for the program, and the project's contribution
to the long-term economic strength of the community.

   Why Mohawk didn't fit those categories isn't completely clear. Cunningham,
when asked, listed the criteria that projects had to meet and said this funding
is only a first step.

   "I think the universities have traditionally been more successful in raising
private-sector money," she said. "The colleges are rapidly catching up, they
have more immediate ties with their alumni."

   All provincial funding in the Superbuild program hinges on the college or
university's ability to raise a designated amount of money privately. McMaster
will have to come up with just under $10 million in private- sector funding.

   Rellinger said Mohawk had letters of support and a commitment of investment
from Bell Canada for its projects. The information technology centre would have
had $1 million in private funding. Cunningham suggested there may be more money
available this year.

   Weingarten said that while the money for capital projects is appreciated, it
must be matched with sufficient money for programs. "What we're still looking
for is money to run the institution. There's no point in putting on programs
that don't give the students a quality education. That's what they're paying
for, that's what they deserve.

   "The real task here is to use money cleverly and carefully and that's what
we're trying to do."

GRAPHIC: Photo: Gary Yokoyama, The Spectator; Dianne Cunningham, Ontario's
colleges and universities minister, announces more than $22 million in
provincial funding at McMaster University yesterday.

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2002


                              516 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                    February 26, 2000 Saturday Final Edition

SECTION: EDITORIAL/OPINION; Pg. D12

LENGTH: 414 words

HEADLINE: Mohawk missing Superbuild boost

SOURCE: The Spectator

BODY:

   DEVELOPMENT: Good news for McMaster

   Something is wrong with Superbuild. Mohawk College, an educational
institution with a proven record of achievement, has been overlooked in the
initial round of funding from the Ontario government's Superbuild growth fund.
Who would have thought that Mohawk would not get out of the starting gate in the
awarding of much-needed Superbuild projects worth $742 million this year?

   The unexpected setback for Mohawk took some of the lustre from the welcome
news that McMaster University will receive $22 million for two projects under
Superbuild. The money will help create new spaces for 2,800 students in the
faculties of science, health sciences, engineering, business, humanities and
social sciences. It's a timely announcement that will help to ease the pressures
upon a university that is bracing for a surge in full-time undergraduate
students by 2005 and must be equipped to handle them.

   McMaster didn't get everything it hoped for. The university had applied for
$43.8 million in total, including a new building for its multimillion-dollar
Centre for Gene Therapy and Immune Modulation. However, the approved projects
are a good start. This is a vote of confidence by the government in the
university's future and it will make a difference in providing McMaster with the
infrastructure that's necessary to deliver high-calibre programs.

   The most immediate concern is Mohawk. The college had applied for two
projects -- creation of a centre for excellence in information technology and a
joint proposal with McMaster to develop a new nursing building. Mohawk officials
say the information centre, especially, received strong support from business,
industry, municipal government and others. It would involve $10 million from
Superbuild and $1 million from the college and the private sector.

   The reasons for Mohawk's lack of Superbuild success aren't clear. Whatever
the problem, it's essential that the difficulties be ironed out, in rapid
fashion. Mohawk's future as a leading community college is at stake and it must
not be overlooked. Talks between college president Catherine Rellinger and
Colleges and Universities Minister Dianne Cunningham would help clear the air
and address any shortcomings on the part of the college or the government.

   -- Gord McNulty

   Editorials are written by members of the editorial board. They represent the
position of the newspaper, not necessarily the individual author.

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2002


                              517 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Sun Media Corporation
                                The Toronto Sun

                   February 26, 2000, Saturday, Final EDITION

SECTION: LIFESTYLE, Pg. 48

LENGTH: 906 words

HEADLINE: UNKINDEST CUTS OF ALL TOP HAIRDRESSERS BEMOAN SORRY STATE OF MEN'S
TRESSES

BYLINE: STEVE PAYNE, TORONTO SUN

BODY:


   Hair today, gone tomorrow.

   Or, in the case of country singer Billy Ray Cyrus, hair yesterday and no more
tomorrow.

   Cyrus, who catapulted to fame in 1992 with the song Achy Breaky Heart, has a
hairstyle known as the mullet, a.k.a. hockey hair, short on top, long and
scraggly at the back.

   Particularly popular in rural areas, mullet devotees, who favour tank tops
and baseball caps, have their own vocabulary, a book, The Mullet: Hairstyle of
the Gods, and an outrageous Web site in which one model has a "molester
moustache" to accompany the hair.

   U.S. headbanger Kid Rock has a mullet and William Peace, of North Bay, may be
North America's richest mullethead after winning $ 18.2 million in the Super 7
lottery.

   "Purgatory," is how Toronto hairstylist Johnny Cupello describes hockey hair,
arguing it's no wonder Cyrus curled into oblivion.

   "No one notices him now," says Cupello. "He should have changed his image.
Madonna does it all the time."

   Mulletheads have no fashion sense, says Rick Haylor, hairdresser to the
stars, including Tom Cruise and his wife Nicole Kidman. "I can't bear to look at
the mullet," he laments.

   Cupello, who has a salon on Bloor St. W., has cut and styled hair for 20
years. He sees mulletheads as males who have no idea which way to turn.

   Mind you, Cupello admits one mirror image too many led him to change his own
locks. After years with a ponytail, he saw a customer with the same look and
decided it was time for drastic personal change. He shaved his head.

   Nowadays, with a few exceptions, he links long hair on men to insecurity.

   "It shows a lack of creation," he suggests. "These men had long hair as a kid
and they think it makes them more youthful to hang on to it. Truth is, they're
afraid to get rid of it. It's the Samson and Delilah thing, cut it off and they
think they'll lose their strength."

   Cupello and fellow hairdresser Robin Barker, who has salons in Yorkville and
Bolton, say short hair is still popular with the modern millennium man.

   It's easier to manage, smart, businesslike and oozes confidence. It washes
quicker, too.

   "The one thing I hate is men who have bald heads and ponytails," says Barker,
a hairdresser for 40 years. "It's ridiculous. It's tacky."

   Barker visualizes men hiding ponytails down the back of their shirt at job
interviews: "Like a rebel without a cause."

   He also scoffs at men who try to cover baldness by combing the few hair
strands they have left across their dome. It looks absurd on a windy day, hair
flapping like a window shutter in a storm. Women detest it.

   Donald Trump works elaborately hard on his flap to give the impression of a
full head of hair.

   Haylor, who was in Toronto this week, is international creative director of
the John Frieda salons in New York, Los Angeles, London and Paris.

   He says the latest men's styles include "the bed head look," keeping the hair
reasonably short but manipulating it to make it appear like you've just crawled
out of bed.

   The Gallagher brothers from the band Oasis sometimes sport bed heads, as does
movie star Brad Pitt.

   Haylor says some men are letting their hair grow a little longer, so it falls
down in front of one eye. Tom Cruise likes that look and so does English soccer
player David Beckham, husband of former Posh Spice.

   DANDY DO'S

   Up to 40% of men now colour their hair, says Johnny Cupello, and dyeing is
particularly popular with teens.

   "Men have become more vain than women," he declares.

   In some households, father and son take more time in the bathroom than mom
and daughter.

   That's not the only hair fashion change Cupello and Robin Barker have noted.

   A couple of decades back, men would never have be seen dead in a hair salon,
let alone allow a woman to cut their hair. Now men are as fussy about their
locks as anyone, putting in streaks, using more colours than the rainbow and
experimenting with styles, gels and various hair-product concoctions.

   Such habits back in the 1960s and '70s would have led to a man being labelled
homosexual by his pals, says Cupello.

   "Men are now coming to terms with themselves," he adds. "You don't have to be
gay to experiment with your hair. In fact, the idea of associating hair with
sexuality is nonsense."

   Barker says men have made something of a return to the Victorian and
Elizabethan eras, when they were called dandies and strutted around like
peacocks.

   "Men are no longer afraid of getting in touch with their feminine side," he
quips.

   WASH THAT GREY RIGHT OUT OF YOUR GENES

   Recent reports suggest gene therapy could replace hair colouring for men and
women.

   According to Fortune 500 magazine, scientists at Jefferson Medical College in
Philadelphia took albino mice and turned their hair dark.

   The process -- chimeraplasty -- involves fixing faulty genes.

   There's still work to be done because the three dark mice only retained the
new look for a few months, hardly better than the best hair dyes on the market.

   So, as for going to the local salon for gene therapy instead of a temporary
tint, that's likely some years off.

   A HAIRCUT BY ANY OTHER NAME...

   According to The Mullet: Hairstyle Of The Gods, the cut, if it can be
described as such, is also known by many other names: The bi-level, shlong,
soccer rocker, ape drape, neck blanket, Long Island ice tease, mud flap, beaver
paddle, squirrel pelt, butt rocker, spooner and the yin and the yang.

GRAPHIC: 1. photo by Ken Kerr BILLY RAY CYRUS ... The country star sports a
mullet.  2. photo Donald Trump uses a comb-over to cover his pate.  3. photo of
TOM CRUISE Hair in his face 4. photo of BRAD PITT "Bed head"

LOAD-DATE: February 29, 2000


                              518 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                     February 25, 2000 Friday Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH & SCIENCE; Pg. E06

LENGTH: 571 words

HEADLINE: Report predicts longer lifetime

SOURCE: The Spectator

BYLINE: Janice Zoeller; Medical Presscorps News Service

BODY:

   A report on the current and future state of the health care system in the
United States predicts increased life expectancy of 86 years for women and 76
years for men by 2010 along with many medical advances and more of an emphasis
on disease prevention.

   The 217-page report, Health & Health Care 2010, was prepared by the Institute
for the Future, Menlo Park, Calif. It details a number of challenges, including
how to address the health needs of an older American population, the shift to
treating chronic diseases and an underfunded public health system.

   Health care costs are expected to rise 6.5 per cent each year for the next 10
years, accounting for 16 per cent of the gross domestic product by 2010, up from
13.5 per cent currently. The number of people covered by health maintenance
organizations (HMOs) will increase to 100 million people by 2005, up from 78
million in 1998.

   The report notes the significant decrease in infectious diseases over the
past century while simultaneously there has been an increase in the incidence of
chronic disease, notably cancer and cardiovascular disease. The effect of heart
disease in terms of death and disability rates is expected to continue to exceed
other illnesses.

   In terms of mortality rates, cancer will continue to rank second. However,
the impact of mental illness, particularly of unipolar major depression, is
expected to have a larger impact than cancer when disability as well as death
are taken into account.

   The report includes a chart of the "determinants of health." While access to
care is a significant concern for many, its impact on health is just 10 per cent
compared to 20 per cent for genetics, 20 per cent attributed to the environment
and fully 50 per cent attributed to behaviours, such as smoking and alcohol
abuse. The report notes, "Much more needs to be done to create and implement
effective health management and disease prevention programs."

   There will be a significant oversupply of hospitals and physicians, with
nearly three new physicians for every one doctor who retires.

   On the legislative front, more regulation of health plan activity and medical
records privacy laws are expected.

   Among new medical technologies that will come to the forefront: use of
diagnostic sensors, genetic mapping and testing, new imaging technologies, gene
therapy and new vaccines.

   The report authors see rational drug design impacting nervous system
disorders and leading to new antiviral therapies.

   Imaging technologies are being developed that present enhanced visual display
of tissues, organ systems and their functions.

   Minimally invasive surgery techniques will be further refined. There will be
new arthroscopic procedures and wider use of image guidance in operations of the
head and neck. Interventional MRI will be used to treat patients with acute
stroke.

   More diseases will likely be found to result from infection, including
perhaps some cancers and rheumatoid arthritis. Prophylactic and therapeutic
vaccines may be available by 2010.

   Although searching for cures for diseases remains an important goal, other
goals are being recognized as important too, including: restoring functional
capacity; relieving suffering; preventing illness, injury and untimely death;
promoting health; and caring for those who cannot be cured.

   The indexed report is published by Jossey-Bass Publishers
(www.josseybass.com), San Francisco.

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2002


                              522 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                     February 11, 2000 Friday Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH & SCIENCE; Pg. C07

LENGTH: 474 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy cuts stroke risk; Cholesterol drops in tests on mice

SOURCE: The Spectator

BYLINE: Paul Candon; Medical Presscorps News Service

BODY:

   Scientists using gene therapy have been able to eliminate the high
cholesterol and fatty deposits in arteries in mice that can lead to strokes and
heart attacks.

   "There is a medical need for effective new therapies to treat people with
high cholesterol levels," said Nicolas Duverger, a researcher at Gencell, part
of the pharmaceutical company Rhone-Poulenc Rorer, in Vitry/Seine, France.

   For the experiment, scientists bred mice that would be predisposed to having
high cholesterol, a contributing factor to the fatty plaque deposits called
atherosclerosis, found in the arteries. These mice lacked a gene called
apolipoprotein E, or apoE.

   The researchers then transplanted either a low or high dose of the human
version of apoE in one set of mice. The protein expressed by this gene helps
remove cholesterol from the bloodstream. Another group of mice received no gene
therapy.

   The study is published in the February edition of Arteriosclerosis,
Thrombosis and Vascular Biology: Journal of the American Heart Association.

   "There were almost zero of the fatty deposits in the blood vessels of the
gene therapy group," said Duverger, the study's lead author. "It has never been
demonstrated that we could completely remove plaque in an animal or human just
by altering the lipoprotein contents of the blood by a gene."

   The reductions in fatty deposits were dose dependent: The high-dose group had
a larger reduction than did the low-dose group.

   However, the gene-therapy treated mice also experienced other benefits. They
had a significant reduction in low-density lipoproteins (LDL), or "bad"
cholesterol, while displaying an increase in high-density lipoproteins (HDL) or
"good" cholesterol.

   The researchers observed a significant decrease of total cholesterol in the
mice within two weeks of the injection of the genes. These levels dropped from
about 600 to 100 milligrams of cholesterol per decilitre of blood. For the
high-dose group, the changes lasted for about five months before the cholesterol
levels began to increase.

   The low-dose group also showed this decrease in total cholesterol, but the
decrease began later and the increase started sooner.

   The mice treated with gene therapy also had significantly reduced levels of
triglycerides. Cholesterol and triglycerides are the two major fats in the
blood.

   In humans, high total cholesterol contributes to atherosclerosis, coronary
artery disease and carotid artery disease. These conditions increase the risk of
heart attack and stroke.

   A total cholesterol level between 140 and 200 milligrams per deciliter is
considered "ideal." When total cholesterol nears 300 milligrams per decilitre,
the heart-attack risk doubles. Similarly, LDL cholesterol levels should be below
130 milligrams per decilitre and HDL cholesterol levels above 40 milligrams per
decilitre.

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2002


                              529 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                     February 1, 2000 Tuesday Final Edition

SECTION: CANADA;WORLD; Pg. C02

LENGTH: 443 words

HEADLINE: Tighter controls for gene therapy

SOURCE: The Spectator

BODY:

   The disclosure of worse-than-shoddy research practices at the University of
Pennsylvania's Institute for Human Gene Therapy sends a cold shiver through the
field. Even ardent supporters of gene therapy -- the promising but as yet
unrealized hope of curing people's inherited disorders by giving them new genes
-- are hard-pressed to explain why a well-regarded research institute would cut
corners, ignore safety checks, fail to file required documents with the
government and otherwise appear to disregard established procedures for the
protection of human subjects in experiments.

   Critics have long expressed concern (which we share) that gene therapy
research is vulnerable to abuse because it is mostly backed by venture capital.
Researchers who are also investors, such as Penn principal investigator James
Wilson, may be tempted to oversell the promise of experiments and keep "adverse
events" quiet lest they depress stock prices. Wilson has said financial interest
plays no role in his research decisions. And no federal conflict-of-interest
rule prevents public research money from being used together with private
funding; such mingling is common.

   The Food and Drug Administration (FDA), investigating after 18-year-old Jesse
Gelsinger died in a Penn experiment, has now shut down all seven pending trials
at the institute, including attempts to cure cystic fibrosis and breast cancer.
The FDA cites 18 violations that include failure to inform patients of risks,
failure to follow the trial's own rules as to which patients (including
Gelsinger) were healthy enough to qualify as subjects, failure to notify the FDA
in timely fashion of serious side effects and failure to halt the experiment as
required when four patients suffered those side effects.

   This is all the more shocking when you consider that these researchers were
working in an area where even the most meticulous and conscientious experiments
carry risk: Experiments with gene therapy frequently involve people already
suffering life-threatening conditions, who may be more vulnerable to unexpected
side effects. All this calls, at the very least, for scrupulous reporting of
risks to the patients concerned, backed up by strong supervision.

   Further investigation -- Penn has said it will form an outside committee,
while Sen. Bill Frist intends to hold hearings -- will likely probe the degree
to which the FDA missed danger signs in confidential reports, waking up only
when public reports emerged through the National Institutes of Health (NIH).
Biotech companies have been calling for less disclosure to NIH, but this
disaster argues for more.

   -- Washington Post

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2002


                              531 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                    January 26, 2000 Wednesday Final Edition

SECTION: FORECAST 2000; Pg. DD10

LENGTH: 1029 words

HEADLINE: Diagnosis is good for Hamilton's health; Hospitals and McMaster add to
livability in the city

SOURCE: Special to The Spectator

BYLINE: Marvin Ross

BODY:

   Hamilton's hospitals -- and their close affiliation with McMaster University
medical school -- are important factors in the economic strength of this area.

   The Hamilton Health Sciences Corporation, St. Joseph's Hospital and the
Hamilton Regional Cancer Centre are more than just Hamilton institutions. They
all provide services for a large catchment region designated as the Central West
Area by the Ministry of Health. This encompasses the area from Niagara Falls to
north of Guelph and from Oakville through to Brantford and Simcoe.

   HHSC is the largest hospital in Canada that is affiliated with a medical
school and the only hospital in Ontario to provide a full range of services.

   St. Joseph's has one of the busiest surgery programs in the country with 14
operating rooms and, in co-operation with the regional Cancer Centre, performs
about 40 per cent of the cancer surgeries in the Central West Area. About 20 per
cent of all Ontario's kidney transplants are performed at this hospital, which
also has one of the busiest obstetrical units in the province. More than 4,000
babies are born annually at St. Joseph's.

   One benefit to the local economy that the hospitals provide is quality of
care.

   John Dolbec, executive director of the Hamilton and District Chamber of
Commerce, says Hamilton was voted as the best place to live in Canada because of
the quality of life in the community.

   The quality-of-life factor is something that companies consider when deciding
where to set up business and it helps to convince business people that Hamilton
is a good place to live.

   And good-quality medical care is an important ingredient contributing to
Hamilton's overall livability rating.

   Hamilton's health facilities also employ a large number of people and spend a
considerable amount on goods and services in the community.

   HHSC is, in fact, the largest single employer in the city. There are 8,200
staff and an additional 1,000 medical personnel at the hospital.

   St. Joseph's employs 2,900 people and 809 medical staff. The cancer centre
has about 430 employees including medical staff.

   St. Joseph's is also beginning a major $80-million expansion and renovation
program, which will provide many jobs in the community while helping to improve
its services.

   Part of the hospital's construction program involves expanding existing
research space, building a new 36-bed Rehabilitation Inpatient Unit.

   St. Joseph's emergency department, the busiest in the city, is also being
expanded and the hospital's medical assessment and cardiac-care units are being
renovated.

   The Firestone Institute for Respiratory Health recently received $17 million
in grants to expand its clinical and research services. More than 20,000 people
per year visit this facility which is ranked as one of the top three respirology
facilities in the world.

   A unique feature of Hamilton that is crucial for the economic development of
a significant knowledge sector in the region is the close collaboration that
exists between the hospitals, their staff, and the Faculty of Health Science.

   Marcel Mongeon, executive director and legal counsel in the Office of
Research Contracts and Intellectual Property at McMaster, says this
collaboration amongst all the players in health care "gives Hamilton the ability
to blow away the market" when it comes to attracting world-class researchers and
research money.

   Many in the health-care sector emphasize this tremendous co-operation.

   Mongeon notes that research aimed at solving the puzzle of the human genetic
code is one area of science that promises exciting medical discoveries. This
research can help provide an understanding, at a molecular level, of how the
body works so that potential cures and treatments can be developed.

   The Centre of Gene Therapy and Immune Modulation was recently established
with almost $7 million in grants from the Ontario Research and Development
Challenge Fund to investigate the use of introducing genes into the body to cure
various diseases.

   McMaster and the hospitals were able to attract one of the world's leading
cardiologists, Dr. Salim Yussuf, to come to Hamilton from the National Institute
of Health in Washington.

   Dr. Jack Hirsh is another leading expert in research into a major cause of
heart attacks and strokes -- blood clots -- while Dr. Herzel Gerstein was
recently awarded the largest contract ever given out by the U.S. National
Institute of Health to a Canadian for his study on heart disease in diabetics.
He received $9.7 million US.

   The Father Sean O'Sullivan Research Centre, which is part of St. Joseph's
Hospital, is another major player in the research collaboration in Hamilton.

   In the past year alone, it was awarded $12 million in research money and the
spinoffs from that provide many new jobs in the community.

   In addition to the basic research into causes and cures of diseases, Hamilton
is becoming a significant world centre for drug trials.

   As part of the process to ensure that a new drug is both safe and effective,
clinical trials are conducted with thousands of people.

   In this kind of research, half the people get a new drug and half a placebo
pill. The medical results and side effects are compared to determine if the new
drug works. Neither the researchers nor the patients knows which is the real
pill and which is fake, to ensure that no biases influence the research results.

   Numerous drug trials have been and are being carried out in Hamilton as part
of world-wide studies.

   Dr. Ken Adachi has been involved with the testing of a treatment for
osteoporosis while Dr. Willy Molloy is heading up a multi-national study of a
potential treatment for Alzheimer's disease.

   Dr. Mark Levine, the former head of the Hamilton Cancer Centre, is also in
the process of establishing the Clinical Research Institute in Hamilton. Part of
the institute's goal is to attract new researchers to Hamilton and to maximize
the potential economic benefits of their work to the community.

   These drug trials create jobs and they also give people in the region the
opportunity to get access to potential new cures.

   set section to whatever

GRAPHIC: Photo: Ted Brellisford, The Spectator; Medical research and quality
care contribute to the financial health of Hamilton.; Photo: John Rennison, The
Spectator; St. Joseph's Hospital is a major employer and surgery centre in the
region.

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2002


                              535 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Sun Media Corporation
                         Edmonton Sun (Alberta, Canada)

                   January 15, 2000, Saturday, Final EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. 2

LENGTH: 330 words

HEADLINE: NEW HOPE FOR HEART PATIENTS GENE THERAPY GROWS BLOOD VESSELS, AVOIDS
SURGERY

BYLINE: SUN MEDIA

DATELINE: TORONTO

BODY:


   Cutting-edge research that actually grows blood vessels inside the heart of a
patient with blocked arteries has revolutionalized cardiology in Canada.

   One month ago yesterday researchers at St. Michael's Hospital performed the
first gene-therapy treatment in Canada on Grenville Dungey, a 52-year-old west
Toronto real estate broker who required heart-bypass surgery on four of his
severely blocked coronary arteries.

   Dungey's cardiovascular surgeon Dr. David Latter, recommended Dungey for a
gene therapy trial because there was an area of his heart that was so severely
diseased that bypass surgery, angioplasty or other surgeries couldn't restore
blood flow.

   If the gene therapy works, it will give heart patients who otherwise could
not be treated a new sense of hope.

   Latter and his team injected Dungey with a DNA treatment - called vascular
endothelial growth factor - that is hoped to stimulate the growth of new blood
vessels in the areas of the heart that were blocked.

   He also underwent bypass surgery.

   The gene Dungey received was taken from a healthy human and cloned in St.
Mike's Terrence Donnelly Heart Centre lab.

   "Performing gene therapy changes the whole paradigm of how we treat heart
patients," said Dr. Duncan Stewart, head of St. Mike's cardiology department.

   Before the procedure Dungey was housebound and could barely walk half a block
without pain.

   On Tuesday, for the first time in months, he was able to walk two blocks
non-stop.

   "I feel great and my strength has come back," he said.

   Latter said in the U.S. there have been 50 patients who have undergone the
same gene therapy VEGF injection and the preliminary results have been "very
promising."

   Stewart said it's unlikely this gene-therapy will replace heart-bypass
surgery because the blood vessels that are grown are not meant to bring large
volumes of blood flow.

   "It's a new kind of treatment that opens the door for the ability to make
long-lasting changes."

LOAD-DATE: January 18, 2000


                              538 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Sun Media Corporation
                                The Toronto Sun

                   January 15, 2000, Saturday, Final EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. 6

LENGTH: 348 words

HEADLINE: SHOT OF GENES TO THE HEART T.O. OPERATION FIRST IN CANADA

BYLINE: SHARON LEM, TORONTO SUN

BODY:


   The latest cutting-edge research that actually grows blood vessels inside the
heart of a patient with blocked arteries, has revolutionized cardiology in
Canada.

   A month ago yesterday researchers at St. Michael's Hospital performed the
first gene therapy treatment in Canada on Grenville Dungey, a 52-year-old,
west-end real estate broker who required bypass surgery on four of his severely
blocked coronary arteries.

   Dungey's cardiovascular surgeon, Dr. David Latter, recommended him for a gene
therapy trial because there was an area of his heart that was so severely
diseased that a bypass, angioplasty or other surgeries couldn't restore blood
flow.

   If the gene therapy works, it will give heart patients who otherwise could
not be treated a new sense of hope.

   Latter and his team injected Dungey with a DNA treatment -- called vascular
endothelial growth factor -- that is hoped to stimulate the growth of new blood
vessels in the areas of the heart that were blocked. He also underwent bypass
surgery.

   The gene Dungey received was taken from a healthy human and cloned in St.
Mike's Terrence Donnelly Heart Centre lab.

   "Performing gene therapy changes the whole paradigm of how we treat heart
patients," said Dr. Duncan Stewart, head of St. Mike's cardiology department.

   Before the procedure, Dungey was housebound and could barely walk half a
block without pain. On Tuesday, he was able to walk two blocks non-stop for the
first time in months.

   'SOMEONE HAD TO GO FIRST'

   "I feel great and my strength has come back," he said.

   "Whether it does or doesn't work, someone had to go first. There will be
generations of people behind me who will get the option to get a better quality
of life they otherwise wouldn't have been afforded," Dungey said.

   Latter said there have been 50 patients in the U.S. who have undergone the
same treatment and the preliminary results have been "very promising."

   Stewart said it's unlikely this gene therapy will replace bypass surgery; the
newly grown blood vessels aren't meant to carry large volumes of blood flow.

GRAPHIC: photo by Mike Cassese SMILES ALL AROUND ... Toronto heart-disease
patient Grenville Dungey, 52, grins after a successful gene therapy operation
carried out by Dr. David Latter at St. Michael's cardiology department, headed
by Dr. Duncan Stewart.

LOAD-DATE: January 17, 2000


                              539 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Sun Media Corporation
                         Edmonton Sun (Alberta, Canada)

                    January 14, 2000, Friday, Final EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. 42

LENGTH: 252 words

HEADLINE: CLONED MONKEY HAILED BY U.S. SCIENTISTS

BYLINE: CP

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:


   Scientists said yesterday they had cloned a monkey - the first non-human
primate to be cloned - in an experiment they hope will result in squads of
genetically identical lab animals perfect for use in testing.

   Tetra, a bright-eyed rhesus macaque, was not created by the same method used
by Scottish researchers that left the world agog over Dolly the sheep. While
Dolly was cloned using nuclear transfer - taking the nucleus out of an adult
cell and using it to reprogram an unfertilized egg - Tetra was made by splitting
a very early embryo into four pieces.

   "The birth of Tetra, a healthy female cloned from a quarter of an embryo,
proves that this approach can result in live offspring," the researchers at the
Oregon Regional Primate Research Centre in Beaverton wrote in the journal
Science.

   The method is commonly used in animals such as cattle but had never before
been used to create a monkey.

   The method has been used to create clones of human embryos at least once.

   In 1993, a doctor said he had cloned human embryos by splitting them, but
later destroyed them.

   Gerald Schatten, who led the Oregon research, said the technique copies what
nature does. "This is just artificial twinning," he said in an interview.

   Schatten said the goal is to produce identical monkeys that could be used to
perfect new therapies for human disease.

   Most medical therapies are now first tested in mice, but monkeys would be
more reliable in developing daring new techniques such as gene therapy.

GRAPHIC: photo of TETRA Artificial twin

LOAD-DATE: January 14, 2000


                              540 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 Metroland Media Group Ltd
                      Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)

                     January 14, 2000 Friday Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH AND SCIENCE; Pg. B05

LENGTH: 632 words

HEADLINE: Monkey cloned by splitting embryo; Genetically identical animals
targeted for medical research

SOURCE: Spectator wire services

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   Scientists said yesterday they had cloned a monkey in an experiment they hope
will result in squads of genetically identical lab animals perfect for use in
testing.

   Tetra, a bright-eyed rhesus macaque, was not created by the same method used
by Scottish researchers that left the world agog over Dolly the sheep.

   While Dolly was cloned using nuclear transfer -- taking the nucleus out of an
adult cell and using it to reprogram an unfertilized egg -- Tetra was made by
splitting a very early embryo into four pieces.

   "The birth of Tetra, a healthy female cloned from a quarter of an embryo,
proves that this approach can result in live offspring," the researchers at the
Oregon Regional Primate Research Centre in Beaverton wrote in the journal
Science.

   The method is commonly used in animals such as cattle but had never before
been used to create a monkey.

   The method has been used to create clones of human embryos at least once. In
1993, a doctor said he had cloned human embryos by splitting them, but later
destroyed them.

   Gerald Schatten, who led the Oregon research, said the technique copies what
nature does. "This is just artificial twinning," he said in a telephone
interview.

   Schatten said the goal is to produce identical monkeys that could be used to
perfect new therapies for human disease.

   Most medical therapies are now first tested in mice, but monkeys would be
more reliable in developing daring new techniques such as gene therapy or
growing new organs from stem cells, Schatten said.

   "It is a huge leap from a mouse to a patient," Schatten said. "The monkeys
could fill that scientific gap.

   "Medical research needs to have healthy, genetically-identical animals so
cures can be perfected before they are tested on humans."

   In their research, Schatten and his colleagues created monkey embryos in the
laboratory by combining sperm and egg. When the embryos grew to an eight-cell
stage, they were each split into four parts, with each part containing two
cells. These were then nurtured into new embryos.

   In effect, he said, the single embryo became four embryos, all genetically
identical. The new embryos were then implanted into the uteri of different
mothers.

   In the first test of the technique, the researchers produced a single animal,
named Tetra. A twin to Tetra was implanted, but miscarried.

   Now, Schatten said, four mother monkeys are pregnant with cells taken from
two separate embryos. Three of the mothers were implanted with two unrelated
embryo splits and the fourth mother was impregnated with a single embryo split.

   Schatten said it will not be known until May, when the animals are born,
which of the split embryos are developing into infants.

   "It is likely that we will have genetically identical monkeys born to
different mothers," he said.

   Schatten said genetically-identical monkeys could be used to develop
treatments using embryonic stem cells, the ancestral cells from which all organs
and tissue grow during gestation.

   Research using human embryonic stem cells is controversial because to produce
the cells requires the death of an embryo.

   Stem cell research, however, offers the promise of growing new organs to
replace ailing hearts or livers, or to cure diabetes.

   His research, Schatten said, may make it possible to split a monkey embryo
and use one part to produce a live monkey, while using the other embryos parts
to produce stem cells. Those stem cells would be genetic matches to the live
monkey. The stem cells could then be used to grow new organs, which could then
be tested on the live monkey.

   For instance, he said, genetically-matched stem cells could be used to grow
insulin-producing organs that could then be transplanted into the live monkeys
to test a promising technique for curing diabetes.

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2002
