
                             1201 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                  April 9, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 18; Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 631 words

HEADLINE: Researchers Find Genetic Defect That Causes Rare Immune Disease

BYLINE: By TIM HILCHEY

BODY:

   Cells taken from a boy who lived for most of his 12 years inside a sterile
protective environment have helped researchers locate the genetic defect that
causes a rare immune system disease.

   Severe combined immunodeficiency disease, which occurs about once in every
100,000 live births, cripples the body's immune system and prevents it from
fighting off even the slightest infection, said Dr. Warren Leonard, chief of
pulmonary and molecular immunology at the National Heart, Lung and Blood
Institute in Bethesda, Md. Dr. Leonard is the lead author of the report, which
appears today in the journal Cell.

    The most common form of the disease, X-linked S.C.I.D., results from a
defective gene passed from mothers to sons on the X chromosome. The gene
produces an incomplete protein that prevents the formation of mature T
lymphocyte cells in the immune system. As a result, Dr. Leonard said, the
patients have few or no T cells.

Early Death Without Transplant

    Maternal antibodies usually protect these babies until they are about 3
months old, when they begin to develop sicknesses, he said. Without successful
bone-marrow transplants, they usually die before their first birthday.

   The cells were taken from David, who was known as the bubble boy, after he
died in Houston in 1984 following an unsuccessful bone-marrow transplant that
was meant to free him from the isolation of the sterile rooms that protected him
from a germ-filled world. His last name has never been disclosed.

   Dr. Claude Lenfant, the director of the institute, said: "We are very, very
excited about this research, and there are really two reasons for it. The first
one is that it's, of course, a very significant, essential contribution to
understanding this particular disease. But also what it does is to tell us about
the cytokine system involved, and that has an impact which goes way beyond the
disease itself."

   Cytokines are protein messengers that among other functions carry information
between cells, Dr. Lenfant said. "Basically, it's a communication system between
all the components of the immune system," he said.

'At Least as Bad as AIDS'

    Dr. Lenfant added, "In discovering the mechanisms and identifying the gene
and its product for this disease, we now have observations which yield a lot
with regard to communications in the immune system and how it functions."

   The genetic defect causes the formation of incomplete interleukin-2
receptors, which help stimulate and regulate the formation of disease-fighting
blood cells.

   "This is a defect where these patients don't have T cells because the T cells
do not appropriately mature in the thymus gland in the first place," Dr. Leonard
said. "Their clinical picture is at least as bad as AIDS.

   "I think the significance for the population at large -- from a clinical
perspective -- is quite limited. But discovering the genetic defect behind this
disease greatly expands the possibilities for developing accurate tests for
prenatal and postnatal diagnosis."

   He added that the research may lead to tests for identifying women who carry
the damaged gene, as well as development of gene therapies to correct the
defect.

   In the future, Dr. Leonard said, scientists might be able to insert normal
genes into a patient's bone-marrow cells or actually repair the mutation. He
cautioned that such therapies would require years of research.

   Others who participated in the study include Dr. Masayuki Noguchi and Dr.
Stephen Adelstein, who worked with Dr. Leonard at the institute; Dr. O. Wesley
McBride, Dr. Huafang Yi and Dr. William S. Modi, all of the National Cancer
Institute in Bethesda; Dr. Howard M. Rosenblatt of the Baylor College of
Medicine in Houston, and Dr. Alexandra H. Filipovich of the University of
Minnesota.

LOAD-DATE: April 9, 1993


                             1202 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1993 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                     April 9, 1993, Friday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL, Pg. A5

LENGTH: 667 words

HEADLINE: BUBBLE BOY'S RARE GENE DISCOVERED

BYLINE: THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

BODY:


   Genetic material from a boy who died after spending his entire life in a
protective bubble has helped scientists find the gene that caused his rare
disease, which robs the body of all defenses.

   Researchers estimate that this gene accounts for about half of all cases of
severe combined immune deficiency disease, or SCID, which occurs in about one in
every 100,000 births.

   The discovery is the latest in a rapid series of breakthroughs into the
genetic underpinnings of illnesses. Scientists in recent weeks have reported
pinpointing the genes that cause such diverse ailments as Huntington's disease
and attention deficit disorder.

   Experts believe many common disorders, such as heart disease and cancer,
result from a complex interplay between several inherited genes and outside
influences, such as diet and other exposures.

   However, other, usually much rarer, disorders apparently stem from a single
miscue in just one gene.

   This was the case in X-linked SCID, a form of the immune deficiency that is
passed from mothers to sons. Researchers from the National Heart, Lung and Blood
Institute in Bethesda, Md., reported their discovery in the latest issue of the
journal Cell, published in Cambridge, Mass.

   The scientists based their work on genetic material taken from three SCID
patients. One of them was David, the best-known victim of the disease.

   The youngster, whose last name was never revealed, lived in plastic bubbles
to protect him from germs. Like other victims, his body lacked key disease-
fighting blood cells called T cells, and he was defenseless against common
microbes.

   The only cure for SCID is a bone marrow transplant, which can furnish the
body with normal blood. David died in Houston in 1984 at age 12 of blood cancer
resulting from a virus he caught when he received marrow from his sister.

   Like the other recent genetic discoveries, this one offers no immediate
prospect of curing the underlying disease.

   ''The key is we are now pointed in the clear direction of how to achieve
that,'' said Dr. Warren Leonard, senior author of the report.

   In this case, it may be possible to someday cure SCID with gene therapy. The
strategy would be to remove blood-forming tissue called stem cells, insert good
copies of the defective gene and then put them back into the victims' bodies.
Experiments with such techniques are in early stages.

   ''Beyond this disease, it brings up the possibility of changing the
regulation of the immune system once you understand how it works,'' said Dr.
Jennifer Puck of Philadelphia's Children's Hospital.

   Puck, who said her group also recently located the gene, said the discovery
may someday enable doctors to boost people's T cells in diseases such as AIDS,
where levels are too low.

   The latest work reveals the cause of X-linked SCID -- a defect in the
interleukin-2 receptor. Interleukin-2 is a hormone that serves as an important
regulator of disease-fighting blood cells. Cells that respond to the hormone
take it in through a spot called the interleukin-2 receptor.

   In X-linked SCID, this receptor is constructed wrong. The receptor is
actually assembled from proteins made by three different genes, and the
scientists found that an error in one of these genes caused the problem.

   Just how a bad receptor leads to a lack of T cells is unclear. However,
researchers said it suggests the receptor is essential for proper functioning of
the thymus gland, which programs immature blood cells to be T cells.

   At birth, babies with this disorder seem well, because they are protected by
antibodies they receive from their mothers. But the disease usually becomes
apparent within three to six months, and victims typically die within a year.

   The gene is contained on the X chromosome. While girls have two of these
chromosomes, boys have just one, which they get from their mothers. As a result,
girls may be carriers of the gene but never get sick, whereas boys who inherit
it invariably get the illness.

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 1995


                             1203 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                       April 9, 1993 Friday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 5A

LENGTH: 421 words

HEADLINE: 'BUBBLE BOY' LEADS TO GENE DISCOVERY

BYLINE: ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: BOSTON

BODY:

   Genetic material from a boy who died after spending his entire life in a
protective bubble has helped scientists find the gene that caused his rare
disease, which robs the body of all defenses.

   Researchers estimate that this gene accounts for about half of all cases of
severe combined immune deficiency disease, or SCID, which occurs in about one in
every 100,000 births.

   The discovery is the latest in a rapid series of breakthroughs into the
genetic underpinnings of illnesses. Scientists in recent weeks have reported
pinpointing the genes that cause such diverse ailments as Huntington's disease
and attention deficit disorder.

   Experts believe many common disorders, such as heart disease and cancer,
result from a complex interplay between several inherited genes and outside
influences, such as diet and other exposures.

   However, other, usually much rarer, disorders apparently stem from a single
miscue in just one gene.

   This was the case in X-linked SCID, a form of the immune deficiency that is
passed from mothers to sons. Researchers from the National Heart, Lung and Blood
Institute in Bethesda, Md., reported their discovery in the latest issue of the
journal Cell, published in Cambridge, Mass.

   The scientists based their work on genetic material taken from three SCID
patients. One of them was David, the best known victim of the disease.

   The youngster, whose last name was never revealed, lived in plastic bubbles
to protect him from germs. Like other victims, his body lacked key
disease-fighting blood cells called T cells, and he was defenseless against
common microbes.

   The only cure for SCID is a bone marrow transplant, which can furnish the
body with normal blood. David died in Houston in 1984 at age 12 of blood cancer
resulting from a virus he caught when he received marrow from his sister.

   Like the other recent genetic discoveries, this one offers no immediate
prospect of curing the underlying disease. In this case, it may be possible to
someday cure SCID with gene therapy.

   At birth, babies with this disorder seem well, because they are protected by
antibodies they receive from their mothers. But the disease usually becomes
apparent within three to six months, and victims typically die within a year.

   The gene is contained on the X chromosome. While girls have two of these
chromosomes, boys have just one, which they get from their mothers. As a result,
girls may be carriers of the gene but never get sick, whereas as boys who
inherit it invariably get the illness.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO BY AP; Genetic material from David, shown in an early 1980s
photo, helped researchers detect the gene that caused his rare immune deficiency
disease. David died after spending his entire life in plastic bubbles because he
had no immune system.; CHART: GENETIC DISEASE DISCOVERIES THIS YEAR; Some
diseases for which scientists have found the underlying gene this year:; Severe
combined immune deficiency disease, also known as "bubble boy disease.";
Huntington's disease.; Attention deficit disorder. Gene probably causes a small
percentage of cases of this common ailment.; Meningiomas and acoustic neuromas,
both brain tumors.; Lou Gehrig's disease, formally known as amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis.; X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy, the disease depicted in the movie
"Lorenzo's Oil."; Alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma, a form of cancer.; X-linked
hyper-IgM syndrome, a defect in maturation of blood cells.; X-linked
agammaglobulineminia, an inherited blood deficiency.; SOURCE: ASSOCIATED PRESS

LOAD-DATE: April 10, 1993


                             1204 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1993 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                          April 9, 1993 Friday, THIRD

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A2

LENGTH: 600 words

HEADLINE: 'BUBBLE BOY' GENE DEFECT FOUND

BYLINE: By DANIEL Q. HANEY AP science writer

DATELINE: BOSTON

BODY:

   Genetic material from a boy who died after spending his entire life in a
protective bubble has helped scientists find the gene that caused his rare
disease, which robs the body of all defenses.

   Researchers estimate that this gene accounts for about half of all cases of
severe combined immune deficiency disease, or SCID, which occurs in about one in
every 100,000 births.

   The discovery is the latest in a rapid series of breakthroughs into the
genetic underpinnings of illnesses. Scientists in recent weeks have reported
pinpointing the genes that cause such diverse ailments as Huntington's disease
and attention deficit disorder.

   Experts believe many common disorders, such as heart disease and cancer,
result from a complex interplay between several inherited genes and outside
influences, such as diet and other exposures.

   However, other, usually much rarer, disorders apparently stem from a single
miscue in just one gene.

   This was the case in X-linked SCID, a form of the immune deficiency that is
passed from mothers to sons. Researchers from the National Heart, Lung and Blood
Institute in Bethesda, Md., reported their discovery in the latest issue of the
journal Cell.

   The scientists based their work on genetic material taken from three SCID
patients. One of them was David, the best-known victim of the disease.

   The youngster, whose last name was never revealed, lived in plastic bubbles
to protect him from germs. Like other victims, his body lacked key
disease-fighting blood cells called T cells, and he was defenseless against
common microbes.

   The only cure for SCID is a bone marrow transplant, which can furnish the
body with normal blood. David died in Houston in 1984 at age 12 of blood cancer
resulting from a virus he caught when he received marrow from his sister.

   Like the other recent genetic discoveries, this one offers no immediate
prospect of curing the underlying disease.

   "The key is we are now pointed in the clear direction of how to achieve
that," said Dr. Warren Leonard, senior author of the report.

   In this case, it may be possible to someday cure SCID with gene therapy.  The
strategy would be to remove blood-forming tissue called stem cells, insert good
copies of the defective gene and then put them back into the patients' bodies.
Experiments with such techniques are in early stages.

   The latest work reveals the cause of X-linked SCID - a defect in the
interleukin-2 receptor. Interleukin-2 is a hormone that serves as an important
regulator of disease-fighting blood cells. Cells that respond to the hormone
take it in through a spot called the interleukin-2 receptor.

   In X-linked SCID, this receptor is constructed wrong. The receptor is
actually assembled from proteins made by three different genes, and the
scientists found that an error in one of these genes caused the problem.

   Just how a bad receptor leads to a lack of T cells is unclear. However,
researchers said it suggests the receptor is essential for proper functioning of
the thymus gland, which programs immature blood cells to be T cells.

   At birth, babies with this disorder seem well, because they are protected by
antibodies they receive from their mothers. But the disease usually becomes
apparent within three to six months, and patients typically die within a year.

   The gene is contained on the X chromosome. While girls have two of these
chromosomes, boys have just one, which they get from their mothers. As a result,
girls may be carriers of the gene but never get sick, whereas as boys who
inherit it invariably get the illness.

GRAPHIC: Genetic material from David, the 'boy in the bubble' who died in 1984
at age 12 of blood cancer, has helped scientists find the gene that caused his
rare disease.  AP FILE PHOTO

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 1993


                             1205 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1993 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                      April 9, 1993, Friday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 317 words

HEADLINE: Gene defects in 'bubble boy,' other ills found

BYLINE: Tim Friend

BODY:

    The gene defect that causes "bubble boy" disease has been found, providing
new insights into the immune system and a means of screening for the disease in
affected families.

   The gene itself was identified several years ago in immune system research.
The new finding, in today's Cell, shows the gene makes a protein needed for
infection-fighting T cells to mature.

   The defective gene makes an incomplete version of the protein, so T cells do
not mature, say researchers Warren Leonard, Wesley McBride and Stephen
Adelstein, National Institutes of Health.

   "Whenever you find the defect in a genetic disease it opens the possibility
of prenatal and postnatal diagnosis, screening and eventually gene therapy,"
Leonard says.

   In the disease, X-linked severe combined immunodeficiency disorder (X-SCID),
sufferers have few or no T cells, making them susceptible to infection. Most die
by age 1.

   X-SCID is the most common form of SCID, arising in 1 in every 100,000 births.
X-linked means the gene is passed only to boys by their mothers.

   Genes from three patients, including David, who lived in a bubble for 12
years and died in 1984, were used in the study.

   Discoveries also out today:

   From Cell, University of Utah scientists report that mutations in the
"elastin" gene cause an inherited disease that narrows arteries. Elastin makes
blood vessels flexible. The defect may be involved in common artery diseases.

   From Science, researchers at Baylor College of Medicine report decoding the
gene for myotonic muscular dystrophy - the adult form of the disease. Breaking
the code will speed research toward new treatments.

   The pace of gene discovery has jumped into warp drive under the national
Human Genome Project. In March alone, scientists reported discovery of genes for
neurofibromatosis-2, adrenal leukodystrophy (Lorenzo's Oil), Huntington's
disease and Lou Gehrig's disease.


                             1206 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1993 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             April 6, 1993 Tuesday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A-1

LENGTH: 1934 words

HEADLINE: Science may suffer as scientists cash in

SERIES: THE RESEARCH TWO-STEP. THIRD OF FOUR PARTS.

BYLINE: REX DALTON, Staff Writer

BODY:

   By this time next year, an unknown biotech company in La Jolla hopes to have
won a heated race to move mankind into a dynamic new realm of medicine: using
genetic therapy to try to cure colorectal cancer and acute leukemia. The planned
clinical trial by Canji Inc. is cited as the quintessential example of taking an
important biological discovery from the laboratory benches of UCSD to patients'
hospital beds. The fruits of more than a decade of federally funded research by
molecular biologist Wen-Wha Lee and associates then would be transferred into a
therapeutic agent to fight cancers that annually kill thousands of Americans.
And it may make Lee a millionaire, since he owns part of Canji, a privately held
company that is on a course to be a Wall Street darling if company stock is sold
to the public as planned. But the history of the efforts of such dark-horse
firms as Canji -- who compete against the world's giant drug conglomerates --
shows the race can be never-ending, with few competitors reaching their goal,
let alone winning the riches that can come with the creation of a miracle drug.
And while no one is criticizing Canji specifically, some skeptics fear that
industry-academic collaborations may threaten academic freedom, limit scientific
research, abuse public institutions and compromise patient welfare.

   Such collaborations also could harm teaching, they add. "Public institutions
have become appendages of industry.

   And it is warping the university toward researchers who can make money," said
UC Davis sociologist Martin Kenney, who in 1986 published "Biotechnology: The
University-Industry Complex." Sheldon Krimsky, a science policy analyst at Tufts
University in Massachusetts, added: "There is a body of research showing an
increase in secrecy," where disclosures regarding academic projects are limited
by their corporate sponsors. UCSD officials feel it is an exaggeration to say
the university is an arm of industry.

   But some university authorities agree with concerns about secrecy, which can
hamper academic collegiality and teaching that historically are the hallmark of
university research. Dr. Paul J. Friedman, dean of academic affairs for the UCSD
School of Medicine, added: "Academic-industry collaborations are complicating
the research relationships.

   The worst thing is the secrecy.

   People are less willing to share research and materials . . . that make
experiments possible.

   That is what is of concern." Martin Rachmiler, who directs UCSD's nascent
Technology Transfer Office, said, "The issue is not how much money people are
making from (a discovery), but how the public benefits.

   And with the technology-transfer process, the public benefit far exceeds
anything we hope to recover (monetarily)." It is the last three years, the UC
system has issued licenses for 20 potential products to firms developing
discoveries from UCSD, officials say.

   Some are close to commercialization, but none are there. Rachmiler
acknowledged that successes in technology transfer here are few. The most
frequently cited success was Hybritech Inc. Formed by UCSD scientists, Hybritech
used monoclonal-antibody technology to develop an array of tests.

   The firm was sold in 1986 to Eli Lilly for $300 million. "It takes a long
time for a product to get on the market, up to 10 years for a human drug," he
added. Some examples of UCSD ideas that are close to fruition are: [] A type of
glucose sensor developed by engineering Professor David A. Gough, which is being
tested at UCLA. The sensor may someday be used in internally implanted insulin
pumps for diabetics. [] A computerized microscope developed by pharmacology
Professor Robert Y. Tsien, which permits scientists to scan extensive test
samples in search of particular microbes. One of the promising examples cited by
Rachmiler is Canji Inc., now owned by a group of venture capitalists based in
the San Francisco area.

   Lee coined the firm's name, Canji, an English hybridization of the Chinese
term for cancer therapy. Genes that suppress cancer In the late 1980s, Lee and
colleagues reported several groundbreaking discoveries related to a gene found
in a rare cancer of the eye, retinoblastoma (RB). The scientists found that the
RB gene was flawed -- mutated in scientific language -- in all cases of
retinoblastoma.

   Scientists later learned it also is mutated in cancers such as lung, bone,
prostate, breast and bladder carcinomas. Lee was the first scientist to describe
the structure of the RB gene.

   And he was the first to show how a normal RB gene -- called a
tumor-suppressor gene -- could be inserted into a cell with the mutated RB gene,
thereby correcting the deficiency. It is this process of inserting
tumor-suppressor genes that is the foundation of Canji's research efforts, said
H. Michael Shepard, the company's vice president for research. The process was
discovered at UCSD, patented by the university and licensed to Canji Inc. for
the development of therapeutics, officials say. Using this gene-insertion
process, Canji officials say they are working to perfect a method whereby
another type of tumor-suppressor gene -- called p53 -- will be given to patients
with colorectal cancer or acute leukemia. The scientists say they hope the
tumor-suppressor gene will enter cells with the mutated gene, alter the cells
and then prompt the body's natural infection-fighting immune system to kill
these formerly malignant cells. "These are very aggressive malignancies for
which there are few alternatives," Shepard noted. If the appropriate federal and
institutional approvals are granted, Canji officials say, the clinical trials
are expected to take place within the year at M.D. Anderson Hospital in Houston
and somewhere in Southern California, at either UCSD, Scripps Clinic and
Research Foundation, or UCLA. Other scientists are working on similar approaches
to gene therapy for these cancers, Lee noted, but he feels the Canji Inc. effort
is in the "leading position" because of his scientific expertise. "I think the
work is very, very exciting," said Lee, who left UCSD in 1991 for the top post
at the University of Texas Institute of Biotechnology, a San Antonio research
facility built with $15 million from Ross Perot. "I think it is going to work.

   We now have a mouse model, where we can make the tumor disappear.

   If this works, why not in humans?

   There is no reason why not." If this gene-therapy method works, it could be
extremely valuable -- in human and monetary terms.

   People might be saved from cancer; but those getting the therapy may pay a
hefty price, if the history of U.S. drug-pricing repeats itself. Like other
professors whose academic achievements have spawned companies, Lee owns stock in
Canji.

   At one point Lee owned a 7 percent interest, company officials say; Lee said
this has been reduced. He sits on Canji's corporate board, with both investors
and other scientists, such as Dr. Jordan U. Gutterman, a University of Texas
researcher at M.D. Anderson in Houston. Lee says he has no employment agreements
with Canji Inc., but serves as "a consultant," and is chief of its scientific
advisory board. `A diamond' Venture capitalists sought him out after publication
of his key discoveries, Lee said, starting the firm in 1989-90. Theodor H.
Heinrichs of Hambrecht & Quist Inc., Canji's primary investor, said, "Canji is
something for my eyes, a diamond, at the moment in the rough." Within a year,
Heinrichs said he expects to sell shares in Canji Inc. to the general public --
possibly changing that diamond in the rough into dollar signs, maybe lots of
them. It is through such initial public stock offerings that fortunes can be
made -- and quickly lost, if results aren't forthcoming. While at UCSD, Lee got
about $250,000 a year from the National Institutes of Health (NIH) for his RB
gene research.

   At San Antonio, he says he is receiving about $500,000 a year from the NIH.
Canji hasn't funded any of his research at UCSD, he says, or at his institute at
the University of Texas Health Science Center in San Antonio. "I want to have
things properly separate . . . except my knowledge," Lee said. It is from Lee's
NIH-funded research that Canji Inc. grew, and grows. And it is around this
concept -- of drug companies, and their investors, profiting from such publicly
funded research -- where most controversy swirls. Investors argue that their
role is needed to bring drugs to the public; and they deserve compensation for
the risks. Canji's Shepard noted that the firm is eating up about $300,000 a
month as it moves toward the clinical trials.

   Canji has absorbed about $13 million in venture funds, Heinrichs says. "There
is no clear answer to this controversy," Heinrichs said.

   "Some take the point of view of private return; some take the view of the
social consequences.

   In this, I see progress." Corporate encroachment Meanwhile, academicians
express concern about corporations taking over academia. "The operative term at
universities today is: corporate funding for research," said Tufts' Krimsky.

   "There are more graduate students involved in private-sector contracts and
research, and the amount of money is much higher." Many universities have a
special administrative process for monitoring professor involvement with outside
firms -- to try to ensure that the public institutions aren't used for private
benefit. Professors performing work for a company -- in which they have an
interest, or are paid by -- are reviewed by conflict-of-interest committees at
the respective UC campuses. Biology Professor Paul Saltman, who chairs UCSD's
Conflict of Interest Committee, said, "The committee is to make sure that what
is done is university-type research, that it is publishable and open, and that
students are involved; that is what we care about." This process, however,
sometimes becomes strained, authorities agree. In the case involving Gough's
research on sensors, committee records are punctuated with strife between the
engineering professor and university administrators. As an example, Gough
ad-libbed as he filled out a statement of economic interest form that professors
are required to complete when they receive a grant from a firm in which they
have an economic interest. The form involved a $6,000 grant from a firm for whom
he also did consulting work, records say.

   It involved another type of sensor, not the glucose sensor, he said. On the
1991 form, Gough wrote: "Note: Much of this form is ridiculous!! It is hard to
imagine that it was created at a university." Other UCSD records show officials
were concerned about "the source of (Gough's) anger," and the fact "his attitude
is less than satisfactory," regarding cooperating with the committee. Saltman
said that some professors feel their academic freedom allows them to do whatever
they please. "There was a philosophical problem," Saltman said.

   "That person didn't understand the task of the committee -- we are to
maximize his academic freedom, while maintaining the integrity of the
university." Occasionally, Saltman said, his committee has to "get through" to
"selfish professors" by making them understand: "Hey, play or not, you have to
play by our rules." But Gough, who is vice chairman of UCSD's department of
applied mechanics and engineering sciences, remains perturbed by the review
process. Professors shouldn't have to disclose to the university their
consulting agreements with companies for whom they perform research, Gough said,
adding that the requirements of the conflict-of-interest office have gone too
far. "There are not a lot of reasons for that office to exist," he said.

GRAPHIC: 1 PIC; CAPTIONS: Wen-Wha Lee: "I think the work is very, very
exciting." (A-15); PHOTOBY: FILE PHOTO

LOAD-DATE: July 30, 2007


                             1207 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1993 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             April 6, 1993 Tuesday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A-1

LENGTH: 1934 words

HEADLINE: Science may suffer as scientists cash in

SERIES: THE RESEARCH TWO-STEP. THIRD OF FOUR PARTS.

BYLINE: REX DALTON, Staff Writer

BODY:

   By this time next year, an unknown biotech company in La Jolla hopes to have
won a heated race to move mankind into a dynamic new realm of medicine: using
genetic therapy to try to cure colorectal cancer and acute leukemia. The planned
clinical trial by Canji Inc. is cited as the quintessential example of taking an
important biological discovery from the laboratory benches of UCSD to patients'
hospital beds. The fruits of more than a decade of federally funded research by
molecular biologist Wen-Wha Lee and associates then would be transferred into a
therapeutic agent to fight cancers that annually kill thousands of Americans.
And it may make Lee a millionaire, since he owns part of Canji, a privately held
company that is on a course to be a Wall Street darling if company stock is sold
to the public as planned. But the history of the efforts of such dark-horse
firms as Canji -- who compete against the world's giant drug conglomerates --
shows the race can be never-ending, with few competitors reaching their goal,
let alone winning the riches that can come with the creation of a miracle drug.
And while no one is criticizing Canji specifically, some skeptics fear that
industry-academic collaborations may threaten academic freedom, limit scientific
research, abuse public institutions and compromise patient welfare.

   Such collaborations also could harm teaching, they add. "Public institutions
have become appendages of industry.

   And it is warping the university toward researchers who can make money," said
UC Davis sociologist Martin Kenney, who in 1986 published "Biotechnology: The
University-Industry Complex." Sheldon Krimsky, a science policy analyst at Tufts
University in Massachusetts, added: "There is a body of research showing an
increase in secrecy," where disclosures regarding academic projects are limited
by their corporate sponsors. UCSD officials feel it is an exaggeration to say
the university is an arm of industry.

   But some university authorities agree with concerns about secrecy, which can
hamper academic collegiality and teaching that historically are the hallmark of
university research. Dr. Paul J. Friedman, dean of academic affairs for the UCSD
School of Medicine, added: "Academic-industry collaborations are complicating
the research relationships.

   The worst thing is the secrecy.

   People are less willing to share research and materials . . . that make
experiments possible.

   That is what is of concern." Martin Rachmiler, who directs UCSD's nascent
Technology Transfer Office, said, "The issue is not how much money people are
making from (a discovery), but how the public benefits.

   And with the technology-transfer process, the public benefit far exceeds
anything we hope to recover (monetarily)." It is the last three years, the UC
system has issued licenses for 20 potential products to firms developing
discoveries from UCSD, officials say.

   Some are close to commercialization, but none are there. Rachmiler
acknowledged that successes in technology transfer here are few. The most
frequently cited success was Hybritech Inc. Formed by UCSD scientists, Hybritech
used monoclonal-antibody technology to develop an array of tests.

   The firm was sold in 1986 to Eli Lilly for $300 million. "It takes a long
time for a product to get on the market, up to 10 years for a human drug," he
added. Some examples of UCSD ideas that are close to fruition are: [] A type of
glucose sensor developed by engineering Professor David A. Gough, which is being
tested at UCLA. The sensor may someday be used in internally implanted insulin
pumps for diabetics. [] A computerized microscope developed by pharmacology
Professor Robert Y. Tsien, which permits scientists to scan extensive test
samples in search of particular microbes. One of the promising examples cited by
Rachmiler is Canji Inc., now owned by a group of venture capitalists based in
the San Francisco area.

   Lee coined the firm's name, Canji, an English hybridization of the Chinese
term for cancer therapy. Genes that suppress cancer In the late 1980s, Lee and
colleagues reported several groundbreaking discoveries related to a gene found
in a rare cancer of the eye, retinoblastoma (RB). The scientists found that the
RB gene was flawed -- mutated in scientific language -- in all cases of
retinoblastoma.

   Scientists later learned it also is mutated in cancers such as lung, bone,
prostate, breast and bladder carcinomas. Lee was the first scientist to describe
the structure of the RB gene.

   And he was the first to show how a normal RB gene -- called a
tumor-suppressor gene -- could be inserted into a cell with the mutated RB gene,
thereby correcting the deficiency. It is this process of inserting
tumor-suppressor genes that is the foundation of Canji's research efforts, said
H. Michael Shepard, the company's vice president for research. The process was
discovered at UCSD, patented by the university and licensed to Canji Inc. for
the development of therapeutics, officials say. Using this gene-insertion
process, Canji officials say they are working to perfect a method whereby
another type of tumor-suppressor gene -- called p53 -- will be given to patients
with colorectal cancer or acute leukemia. The scientists say they hope the
tumor-suppressor gene will enter cells with the mutated gene, alter the cells
and then prompt the body's natural infection-fighting immune system to kill
these formerly malignant cells. "These are very aggressive malignancies for
which there are few alternatives," Shepard noted. If the appropriate federal and
institutional approvals are granted, Canji officials say, the clinical trials
are expected to take place within the year at M.D. Anderson Hospital in Houston
and somewhere in Southern California, at either UCSD, Scripps Clinic and
Research Foundation, or UCLA. Other scientists are working on similar approaches
to gene therapy for these cancers, Lee noted, but he feels the Canji Inc. effort
is in the "leading position" because of his scientific expertise. "I think the
work is very, very exciting," said Lee, who left UCSD in 1991 for the top post
at the University of Texas Institute of Biotechnology, a San Antonio research
facility built with $15 million from Ross Perot. "I think it is going to work.

   We now have a mouse model, where we can make the tumor disappear.

   If this works, why not in humans?

   There is no reason why not." If this gene-therapy method works, it could be
extremely valuable -- in human and monetary terms.

   People might be saved from cancer; but those getting the therapy may pay a
hefty price, if the history of U.S. drug-pricing repeats itself. Like other
professors whose academic achievements have spawned companies, Lee owns stock in
Canji.

   At one point Lee owned a 7 percent interest, company officials say; Lee said
this has been reduced. He sits on Canji's corporate board, with both investors
and other scientists, such as Dr. Jordan U. Gutterman, a University of Texas
researcher at M.D. Anderson in Houston. Lee says he has no employment agreements
with Canji Inc., but serves as "a consultant," and is chief of its scientific
advisory board. `A diamond' Venture capitalists sought him out after publication
of his key discoveries, Lee said, starting the firm in 1989-90. Theodor H.
Heinrichs of Hambrecht & Quist Inc., Canji's primary investor, said, "Canji is
something for my eyes, a diamond, at the moment in the rough." Within a year,
Heinrichs said he expects to sell shares in Canji Inc. to the general public --
possibly changing that diamond in the rough into dollar signs, maybe lots of
them. It is through such initial public stock offerings that fortunes can be
made -- and quickly lost, if results aren't forthcoming. While at UCSD, Lee got
about $250,000 a year from the National Institutes of Health (NIH) for his RB
gene research.

   At San Antonio, he says he is receiving about $500,000 a year from the NIH.
Canji hasn't funded any of his research at UCSD, he says, or at his institute at
the University of Texas Health Science Center in San Antonio. "I want to have
things properly separate . . . except my knowledge," Lee said. It is from Lee's
NIH-funded research that Canji Inc. grew, and grows. And it is around this
concept -- of drug companies, and their investors, profiting from such publicly
funded research -- where most controversy swirls. Investors argue that their
role is needed to bring drugs to the public; and they deserve compensation for
the risks. Canji's Shepard noted that the firm is eating up about $300,000 a
month as it moves toward the clinical trials.

   Canji has absorbed about $13 million in venture funds, Heinrichs says. "There
is no clear answer to this controversy," Heinrichs said.

   "Some take the point of view of private return; some take the view of the
social consequences.

   In this, I see progress." Corporate encroachment Meanwhile, academicians
express concern about corporations taking over academia. "The operative term at
universities today is: corporate funding for research," said Tufts' Krimsky.

   "There are more graduate students involved in private-sector contracts and
research, and the amount of money is much higher." Many universities have a
special administrative process for monitoring professor involvement with outside
firms -- to try to ensure that the public institutions aren't used for private
benefit. Professors performing work for a company -- in which they have an
interest, or are paid by -- are reviewed by conflict-of-interest committees at
the respective UC campuses. Biology Professor Paul Saltman, who chairs UCSD's
Conflict of Interest Committee, said, "The committee is to make sure that what
is done is university-type research, that it is publishable and open, and that
students are involved; that is what we care about." This process, however,
sometimes becomes strained, authorities agree. In the case involving Gough's
research on sensors, committee records are punctuated with strife between the
engineering professor and university administrators. As an example, Gough
ad-libbed as he filled out a statement of economic interest form that professors
are required to complete when they receive a grant from a firm in which they
have an economic interest. The form involved a $6,000 grant from a firm for whom
he also did consulting work, records say.

   It involved another type of sensor, not the glucose sensor, he said. On the
1991 form, Gough wrote: "Note: Much of this form is ridiculous!! It is hard to
imagine that it was created at a university." Other UCSD records show officials
were concerned about "the source of (Gough's) anger," and the fact "his attitude
is less than satisfactory," regarding cooperating with the committee. Saltman
said that some professors feel their academic freedom allows them to do whatever
they please. "There was a philosophical problem," Saltman said.

   "That person didn't understand the task of the committee -- we are to
maximize his academic freedom, while maintaining the integrity of the
university." Occasionally, Saltman said, his committee has to "get through" to
"selfish professors" by making them understand: "Hey, play or not, you have to
play by our rules." But Gough, who is vice chairman of UCSD's department of
applied mechanics and engineering sciences, remains perturbed by the review
process. Professors shouldn't have to disclose to the university their
consulting agreements with companies for whom they perform research, Gough said,
adding that the requirements of the conflict-of-interest office have gone too
far. "There are not a lot of reasons for that office to exist," he said.

GRAPHIC: 1 PIC; CAPTIONS: Wen-Wha Lee: "I think the work is very, very
exciting." (A-15); PHOTOBY: FILE PHOTO

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                             1208 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1993 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                     April 6, 1993, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 5D

LENGTH: 901 words

HEADLINE: Cracking cancer's genetic code: Clues to prevention, treatment

BYLINE: Tim Friend

BODY:

    Through the study of genes and the code of life written upon them, we are at
last beginning to glimpse how cancer arises in a single cell, spreads through
the body and evades our best efforts to destroy it.

   Whether inherited or induced, we now know that at the heart of all cancer is
a tiny misprint in the genetic instructions of our cells - a word deleted or
misspelled, or a phrase printed in the wrong sentence.

   And after decades of frustration with toxic cancer treatments that, like a
shotgun, blast the body along with the tumor, the seemingly academic pursuit of
how our genes work has brought us to the threshold of a therapeutic revolution.
Gene therapy, getting under way in 47 trials worldwide, may ultimately prove to
be the least toxic, most direct way to edit the misprints that cause cancer.

   "All cancer is genetic at the cellular level," says Dr. Michael Gottesman,
director, National Human Genome Project and chief of molecular biology at the
National Cancer Institute. "Our understanding of genetics has contributed
enormously to the understanding of cancer."

   The link between cancer and genes has been drawn most clearly since 1983,
when a new gene-hunting technique called "positional cloning" was developed.
Positional cloning means linking specific misprints in gene coding with specific
diseases. Experts say its development by Ray White, University of Utah, Salt
Lake City, and others, was among the most important advances for pinpointing key
genes - including those linked to cancer.

   With the Human Genome Project, in which hundreds of scientists now search for
genes, the pace of discovery has jumped into warp
drive.   And as genes for specific cancers have begun appearing,

they reveal broad insights into how cancers arise.

   Two landmark discoveries are genes for a rare eye cancer called
retinoblastoma, and for Li-Fraumeni syndrome, in which affected family members
get many different tumors.

   "The retinoblastoma gene is now known as a tumor-suppressor gene, and it
turns out to be a model for the understanding of cancer," says Laurence Meyer,
VA Medical Center and University of Utah, Salt Lake City. Meyer is tracking a
gene responsible for malignant melanoma.

   Li-Fraumeni syndrome led to the discovery of the p53 gene - an important
tumor-suppressor gene involved in cancers of the colon, lung and breast.

   But, to understand cancer genes, it's important to know how genes work,
Gottesman says. The human body has 30,000 to 100,000 genes. Each gene carries
instructions for making proteins, such as enzymes, which run the biochemical
machinery of the body.

   The genetic language is written in chemical code, which corresponds to the
letters ATGC. Adenine, Thymine, Guanosine and Cytosine are the building blocks
of DNA and the substance of our genes. Various combinations of ATGC, which can
be thousands or millions of letters long, determine the function of a gene.

   As cells routinely divide, misprints in the ATGC sequences arise in 1 in
every million cell divisions. The reason we all don't get cancer is the body has
a built-in DNA repair kit for random mutations. And we usually have two copies
of each gene as a backup in case we inherit a mutation or the coding just gets
messed up.

   "Cancer is caused by a failure of the regulation of genes that normally
control cell growth," Meyer says. "It appears in many cases that the initial
insult is that you inherited one bad regulatory gene and this gives you an
increased likelihood of a total failure of growth regulation because you don't
have a backup copy."

   Tumor suppressor genes, such as retinoblastoma and p53, appear to prevent
cells from dividing out of control. Tumor promoter genes signal cells to divide.

   Adds Gottesman: "It turns out that most human cancers require both types of
mutations - ones that tell cells to grow and ones that fail to tell them not to
grow."

   But what causes the misprint, or change in DNA, to begin with? For inherited
cancers, a mutation or missing gene can arise spontaneously and is passed
through generations. For non-inherited cancers, one new and intriguing theory
suggests its origin is closely related to healing.

   Biochemist Harry Antoniades, Harvard School of Public Health, has shown that
the same genes and substances that stimulate cell growth after an acute injury
are turned on in malignant tissues. This month he will publish findings showing
similarities between healing and lung cancer, meningioma, idiopathic pulmonary
fibrosis, brain astrocytoma, gastric carcinoma and prostate cancer.

   "The only difference we could see was that in acute injury, after the wound
healed, all gene expression was suppressed. In tumors, it continues," says
Antoniades.

   His research suggests long-term exposure to carcinogens creates a chronic
"injury" in which growth genes and substances called growth factors are kept
stimulated. Chronic exposure keeps tissues inflamed and may trigger the release
of harmful oxygen molecules, called free radicals, which can damage DNA.

   His research is among the first to demonstrate the pathway from exposure to
carcinogens, to oxidative damage, to gene expression and release of growth
factors to DNA damage and cancer.

   Says Antoniades: "These areas will all come together. Connecting all the
growth factor genes to free radical gene damage and DNA repair, this will become
the new way."


                             1209 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1993 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                     April 6, 1993, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 5D

LENGTH: 265 words

HEADLINE: Therapy can tame rogue cells that have run amok

BODY:

    A lone herpes virus gene inside the shell of a mouse virus tumbles down a
long needle into a mass of rapidly dividing cancer cells in a person's brain.

   The mouse virus instinctively turns on its machinery, seizes the dividing
cells and inserts its payload inside. The herpes gene, like a despotic ruler,
assimilates the DNA of the cancer cell, forcing it to behave and look like
herpes.

   In a few days, when the herpes genes have taken over as many tumor cells as
possible, Dr. Kenneth Culver, Genetic Therapy, Inc., will give an anti-herpes
drug, killing the cells that carry the herpes gene.

   "When it comes to gene therapy, we're only limited by our imagination," says
Culver, who has pioneered the era of gene therapy at the National Cancer
Institute, with Drs. Michael Blaese and French Anderson.

   The strategy is being tried at the National Cancer Institute by neurosurgeons
Edward Oldfield, Zvi Ram and Stuart Walbridge. It's one of the latest in a
series of gene therapies for cancer.

   "Gene therapy is the introduction of a gene or genes into a patient's cells
to provide a new set of temporary or permanent instructions to those cells,"
Culver says.

   Gene therapy may be used to:

   Correct an inherited gene defect, such as cystic fibrosis.

   Reverse an acquired gene defect such as the p53 gene mutation involved in
colon, lung and breast cancer.

   Program a cell for a new property, such as making insulin or to resist HIV
infection.

   So far, human trials are approved for melanoma, neuroblastoma, ovarian
cancer, renal cell carcinoma, brain tumors and lung cancer.

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC, color, Nick Galifianakis, USA TODAY, Source: USA TODAY
research (Diagram); PHOTO, color, Brian Phelps, AP


                             1210 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1993 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                     April 6, 1993, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 5D

LENGTH: 184 words

HEADLINE: Drug-resistant genes as vehicles for a cure

BODY:

    Discovery of the so-called multi-drug resistance gene has created new
potential for improving the success of traditional cancer therapies - and sheds
light on how humans have evolved to resist carcinogens.

   The MDR gene makes a substance called p-glycoprotein, which pumps carcinogens
and toxins out of healthy cells. But the gene also is often activated during
chemotherapy since most agents are synthesized from natural toxins. So while the
gene helps avoid cancer, it also can make treatment more difficult.

   "We call the multi-drug transporter mechanism a double-edged sword," says Dr.
Michael Gottesman, National Cancer Institute, who co-discovered the gene with
NCI's Dr. Ira Pastan.

   In a gene therapy trial, Gottesman will insert the gene in bone marrow cells,
allowing doctors to give higher doses of chemotherapy. "There are many cancers
in which it appears that if a little more chemotherapy was given, survival rates
would be higher."

   Another strategy shows cyclosporin can be given to preoccupy the pump during
chemotherapy, says Dr. Alan List, Arizona Cancer Center, Tucson.


                             1211 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1993 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                    April 2, 1993, Friday, ONE STAR EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL, Pg. B1

LENGTH: 497 words

HEADLINE: PITT BIOTECH CENTER OPENING

BYLINE: BYRON SPICE, SCIENCE EDITOR, POST-GAZETTE

BODY:


   Research to ease plastic recycling, to develop a portable artificial kidney
and to treat genetic diseases will get a boost with today's opening of the
University of Pittsburgh's biotechnology center, its director says.

   The $ 14 million building in the riverfront Pittsburgh Technology Center in
Hazelwood is all but empty now. But the next six months will see a steady influx
of scientists, engineers and clinicians, said Jerome Schultz, director and chief
scientist of the Center for Biotechnology and Bioengineering.

   Much of the research already is under way at Pitt, Schultz said, but ''now
that we have this facility, we have the opportunity to expand.'' About 30 to 50
researchers scattered around the university will move into the 80,000-
square-foot building. Hiring will eventually double the number of researchers,
he added.

   Among the programs the center will support is Pitt's ambitious plans for
treating genetic diseases. The center will contain a laboratory for correcting
genetic defects in cells extracted from patients with such ailments as Gaucher's
disease, cancer or cystic fibrosis. These cells will then be infused back into
the patients in hope of correcting the condition.

   The University of Michigan is the only other university with such a facility,
which could become a resource for hospitals throughout the region, Schultz said.
The lab will have air-filtered clean rooms similar to those used in producing
semiconductors and pharmaceuticals.

   The center also will be a new home for Pitt's artificial organ group, which
is developing devices that aid or replace weakened hearts and lungs. Also under
development is a portable artificial kidney that could free kidney patients from
having to visit dialysis centers every three days.

   In addition to artificial organs and gene therapy, a third major area housed
at the center has to do with protein engineering. Biochemist Alan Russell, for
instance, is trying to alter enzymes so that they can be used under high
pressure or high temperature in industrial bioprocessing.

   One enzyme might be used to aid in recycling plastics. Plastics can be
dissolved when carbon dioxide is pressurized, becoming a ''supercritical fluid''
with characteristics of both a gas and a liquid. If an enzyme could work under
such high pressure, it might help in degrading plastics and preparing them for
reprocessing, Schultz said.

   Enzymes, which normally work at body temperature, might also be used to
produce certain chemicals and pharmaceuticals if they can be modified to work at
high temperatures, Schultz said. The enzymes are attractive, he said, because
they produce only certain forms of chemicals, eliminating the danger of
producing an inactive or unsafe form.

   The state Department of General Services paid for the four-story building.
Gov. Casey, Pitt Chancellor J. Dennis O'Connor and other local, state and
university officials will participate in the opening ceremony at 1:30 p.m.
today.

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 1995


                             1212 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1993 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                            April 1, 1993, Thursday

SECTION: HEALTH WATCH; Section E; Page 4

LENGTH: 391 words

HEADLINE: French abortion pill showing some success against brain tumors

BYLINE: By Amanda Husted STAFF WRITERhealth; care; medicine; abortion; research;
drugs; cancer

BODY:

   San Diego - The French abortion pill RU-486 appears to produce modest
improvement in some patients with inoperable brain tumors, researchers said
Wednesday, but it may be five years before they know whether it really prolongs
patients' lives.

   Although the medicine cannot be brought into the United States for abortions,
the U.S. Food and Drug Administration permits its use in medical experiments.

   U.S. researchers started testing the drug on cancer patients in 1987. In a
test group of 28 volunteers, eight showed measurable improvement.

   "We thought that was encouraging, but not definitive," said researcher Steven
Grunberg of the University of Southern California School of Medicine in Los
Angeles. But researchers want to make sure they weren't overestimating small
improvements.

   The drug is being tested on a dozen patients who have a normally benign tumor
of the tissues that line the brain and spinal column called meningioma. About
2,500 Americans annually develop such tumors.

   Researchers at the Southwest Oncology Group hope to enroll up to 200 patients
to determine if the anti-progesterone drug will shrink or at least stop growth
of the cancer.

   Dr. Grunberg and other scientists described several other experimental
treatments for cancers of the brain and central nervous system at a meeting of
the American Cancer Society Wednesday:

   Kenneth W. Culver at Genetic Therapy Inc. in Gaithersburg, Md., has started
tests with human volunteers using the herpes virus gene to treat malignant
tumors. Working with laboratory animals, he determined he could shrink tumors
when he injected the gene at the tumor site, and then followed up with
injections of anti-herpes drugs. So far, the treatments appear to shrink tumors
in animals without harming healthy brain tissue. Dr. Culver says he believes his
treatment also might work for tumors of the liver, ovaries, head and neck.

   Gale A. Granger, at the University of California-Irvine, is ready to begin
human trials of a promising treatment for glioblastoma, a deadly brain cancer
that resists all current treatments. Dr. Granger's experiments in rats indicate
that an animal's immune system will attack a tumor when tissue from another
animal is implanted near the tumor site. Fifty percent of the treated rats were
cured, and the survivors have strong anti-tumor defenses.

LOAD-DATE: April 14, 1993


                             1213 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1993 The Columbus Dispatch
                            Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)



                            April 1, 1993, Thursday

SECTION: NEWS LOCAL & NATIONAL; Pg. 11C

LENGTH: 626 words

HEADLINE: GENES MAY BE NEXT WEAPON IN CANCER FIGHT

BYLINE: Laurie Loscocco; Dispatch Medical Reporter

DATELINE: SAN DIEGO

BODY:


   Bombarding cancer patients with toxic drugs and radiation may not be
necessary one day, as scientists hone in on ways to outsmart the disease.

   ''The days of tailoring chemotherapy to make it more toxic are near the
end,'' said Dr. Kenneth Culver, a co-investigator and consultant in the human
gene therapy studies at the National Cancer Institute. Manipulating the genetic
arm of cancer ''will create medicines of the future that have the potential not
only of treating but preventing cancer,'' Culver said yesterday.

   He spoke at an American Cancer Society science writers meeting, at which the
prospect of using RU486 - the so-called abortion pill - to treat certain benign
brain tumors also was discussed.

   Culver is studying using gene therapy to eliminate brain tumors. The work
involves making tumor cells sensitive to a drug called ganciclovir by
transferring genes directly into the tumor.

   In direct gene transfer, a virus is treated with a gene that makes cancer
cells susceptible to ganciclovir. The virus carries the gene into the tumor,
which then becomes vulnerable to the drug. Ganciclovir is administered about a
week later and attacks only those cells that are dividing. That's crucial
because, while most of the brain is relatively quiet, cancer cells divide
constantly and sometimes rapidly.

   Ganciclovir-susceptible cells cannot divide and therefore die, Culver said.
He has studied the drug in rats and found that tumors regressed in 11 of 14
treated rats, while tumors grew in rats that weren't receiving gene therapy.

   Culver now is using the experimental treatment on seven people. Although the
patients haven't had serious side effects from the treatment, it is too soon to
tell whether the therapy is reducing their tumors, he said.

   Brain tumors are among the most difficult of all cancers to treat, said Dr.
Howard Tung, a neurosurgeon at the Scripps Clinic in La Jolla, Calif.

   ''It would truly be a breakthrough if these patients were to have prolonged
survival and improved function,'' Tung said.

   The trend in much cancer research today is away from ''brute force'' and
toward ''looking for better ways to target tumors exclusively by learning about
their biology,'' said Dr. Steven Grunberg of the University of Southern
California School of Medicine in Los Angeles.

   Grunberg presented research on the drug RU486, which he said may be useful in
treating a benign but debilitating type of brain tumor.

   The tumor, called a meningioma, attacks tissues lining the brain and spinal
cord. While meningiomas usually can be removed surgically, some can't because of
their location.

   Left unchecked, meningiomas can cause blindness, paralysis or seizures, said
Grunberg.

   He said it is likely that female sex hormones are involved in the development
of the tumors. RU486 interferes with production of the hormone progesterone,
which is necessary to maintain a pregnancy.

   Eight of 28 patients treated with RU486 appeared to benefit from the drug -
with shrinking of the tumor, improvement in vision or other changes, such as
fewer and less severe headaches, Grunberg said. ''These results are encouraging
but not definitive.'' He added that much more information is needed to determine
whether the drug is effective.

   About 200 patients are to be enrolled in a nationwide study to test the drug.
Half the patients will get the drug, while the other half will get a placebo.
Placebo patients whose tumors grow will be allowed to cross over and receive the
drug, Grunberg said.

   Although RU486 has been the subject of much controversy in the Unied States,
Grunberg said he has not run into political problems because of the study. ''We
did not start these projects to make a statement about RU486,'' he said.

LOAD-DATE: July 5, 1994


                             1214 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1993 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    April 1, 1993, Thursday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: A; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 594 words

HEADLINE: New research helps to explain how malignant tumors develop

BYLINE: RUTH SoRELLE, Houston Chronicle Medical Writer; Staff

BODY:

   A finding revealed today by researchers at the University of
Texas M.D.Anderson Cancer Center sheds new light on the process
that gives rise to malignant tumors.

   In an article in today's issue of Cancer Research, Jack
Roth, chairman of the department of thoracic and cardiovascular
surgery and a professor of tumor biology at Anderson, unravels the
mystery behind a process called ""field cancerization'' by studying
a single gene that appears to be involved in the development of two
separate cancers in a single patient.

   The theory of ""field cancerization'' as first proposed 40
years ago is that the epithelium covering the entire respiratory
and upper digestive tracts is first exposed to a carcinogen, such
as cigarette smoke or chemical cancer-causing agents.

   However, the cancer is not triggered until a second event
occurs, in this case a gene mutation.

   Dr. Roth and his team evaluated 31 patients who had
developed two separate cancers called primary cancers of the head
and neck, esophagus or lung.  The second cancers were determined not
to be the result of spread from the first, Roth said.

   Using precise DNA analysis techniques, the scientists zeroed
in on the p53 gene, which is the most commonly mutated gene found
in cancers.

   The p53 gene appears to be part of the control process that
prevents a cell from dividing abnormally.  Such abnormal division
leads to malignant disease.

   When a person is missing both copies of the p53 gene (found
on the individual's pair of chromosome 17) or when there is a
mutation of the gene or genes, then the control is lost.

   In 21 of the patients, the researchers found that there were
at least two separate mutations of the p53 gene, leading them to
believe that the two cancers developed after separate changes in
the p53 genes.

   The finding could have immediate value because ""it allows
us to be able to differentiate patients who have multiple primary
cancers from patients who developed recurrences (of the original
tumor) or metastases (spread of the original tumor),'' said Roth.

   ""A patient who has two different primary cancers could have
a favorable outcome because his or her ultimate survival would be
dependent on the stage of each primary tumor,'' Roth said.

   A person in whom a head and neck cancer and a lung cancer
were discovered at an early stage would have a better chance of
surviving than a patient whose head and neck cancer had spread to
the lung.

   ""It is often difficult to distinguish between the two
conditions,'' said Roth.  Now his team will look for particular
markers that will let them identify patients better.

   ""It also tells us that the p53 tumor suppressor gene is
important in development of all these tumors,'' he said.  ""It gives
us a clue that manipulating the gene through gene therapy or some
other technique that affects p53 might enable us to treat these
cancers more effectively or even prevent development of multiple
cancers. ''

   The 10 patients in whom no p53 abnormality was found or with
only one are apparently affected by other factors that Roth said
should be pursued.

   The finding also has application for a relatively large
number of patients.  In those who have had cancers of the head and
neck, the risk of developing a second cancer is 3 to 7 percent per
year.  ""Within 10 years, that could vary between 30 and 70
percent'' based on tumor type and other factors, Roth said.

   Currently, Roth is expanding his study and looking at
patients with different diseases, such as colon cancer.


LOAD-DATE: April 8, 1993


                             1215 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1993 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe



                    March 31, 1993, Wednesday, City Edition

SECTION: ECONOMY; Pg. 43

LENGTH: 434 words

HEADLINE: Cellcor will cut 50% of work force

BYLINE: By Ronald Rosenberg, Globe Staff

BODY:

    Cellcor Inc., which provides a controversial therapy for kidney cancer,
yesterday said it would shut most of its commercial operations, suspend further
patient treatment and dismiss 50 percent of its work force.

   The Newton biotechnology company said it restated its 1992 financial results
to include a one-time charge of $ 2.3 million for the restructuring, which is
tied to its decision to seek Food and Drug Administration approval for its
cancer treatment.

   Cellcor said that 42 employees, including 13 in Massachusetts, would be laid
off. The remaining cuts will come from its offices in Atlanta and Orange,
Calif., which will closed April 30.

   With fewer employees, the company expects to cut in half its $ 1 million
monthly operating costs. Cellcor said it has $ 13 million in cash and
investments.

    Cellcor said it would seek FDA approval for its living cell therapy, called
autolymphocyte therapy (ALT), which it claims extends the life of patients with
kidney cancer. Richard D'Antoni, Cellcor's president and chief executive, said
winning FDA approval would quiet Cellcor's critics.

   Some physicians maintain that ALT does not prolong life as promised by the
company. Others, notably Arnold Relman, former editor of the New England Journal
of Medicine, claim Cellcor's ALT has not been supported by sufficient scientific
testing and published clinical results.

   "One of our objectives in pursuing an FDA approval is to deal with our
critics," said D'Antoni. "Some physicians are reticent to use the therapy that
is novel and doesn't have any FDA approval. Now the FDA has addressed that."

   For years, D'Antoni has insisted that ALT did not require FDA product
approval as would a new drug, noting that the agency did not regulate cell and
gene therapies. But earlier this year the FDA expanded its regulations to
include such treatments, prompting Cellcor to alter its operations.

   D'Antoni said the company expects to begin an FDA clinical trial in September
involving 200 patients at 15 centers, including New England Baptist Hospital in
Boston.  Cellcor still faces a shareholder lawsuit stemming from charges that
questioned ALT's effectiveness and prompted a rapid decline in the company's
stock.

   Yesterday, Cellcor's shares closed at 1, down 3/8 in over-the-counter
trading. The company went public in 1992 and its stock traded as high as 10 3/4
last March.

   After restating 1992 results, Cellor posted a loss of $ 12.5 million, or $
2.65 a share, on revenue of $ 2.7 million. That compared with a 1991 loss of $
9.8 million, or $ 3.97 a share, on revenue $ 1.5 million.

LOAD-DATE: April 1, 1993


                             1216 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1993 The Buffalo News
                            Buffalo News (New York)



                    March 31, 1993, Wednesday, First Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 414 words

HEADLINE: ANTI-CANCER GENE THERAPY DEVELOPED BY SCIENTISTS

DATELINE: SAN DIEGO (AP)

BODY:

    Scientists have developed the first medicines intended to stop malignancy by
disarming a rogue cancer gene, an approach that could help control many forms of
tumors.

   The new treatment is intended to block a cancer-causing gene -- a so-called
oncogene -- that appears to play a role in cancer of the breast and pancreas,
among other organs.

   Although the ultimate cause of cancer is often a mystery, scientists have
learned in recent years that mutations in several genes are critical steps on
the path to malignancy. When these normal genes go bad, cells lose control over
their growth, and cancer results.

   The latest approach is intended to short-circuit this process by attacking an
oncogene known in scientific shorthand as neu.

   At the University of California, Los Angeles, Dr. Dennis J. Slamon has
started safety testing of an antibody intended to thwart the protein made by the
neu gene's protein. While early results are considered encouraging, the works is
still too preliminary to judge whether it will work.

   Meanwhile, Dr. Mark I. Greene of the University of Pennsylvania, who is
developing a similar strategy, said it has shown great promise in tumor-prone
lab animals. He plans to begin testing it on people within a year.

   He said his animal studies provide "the first demonstration that one can
prevent genetically driven tumors."

   The new oncogene makes a protein called P185. This plays a role in triggering
cells' uncontrolled growth. Greene's strategy is to fashion an antibody that
locks onto this protein and renders it harmless.

   "It opens up an approach for preventing breast cancer by a whole new
mechanism -- by interfering with gene products," commented Dr. Victor Vogel of
the M.D. Anderson Cancer Center in Houston.

   Greene presented his findings Tuesday at a meeting of the American Cancer
Society.

LOAD-DATE: April 2, 1993


                             1217 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                March 31, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section D; Page 4; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 137 words

HEADLINE: COMPANY NEWS;
CELLCOR TO SHUT SOME OPERATIONS, SHRINK ITS STAFF

BYLINE: AP

BODY:

   Cellcor Inc., a biotechnology company in Newton, Mass., said yesterday that
it would close operations in Boston, Atlanta and Orange, Calif., by April 30 and
reduce its work force from 87 employees to 45. Richard D'Antoni, president of
the company, said the move was prompted by a Food and Drug Administration
decision last month to establish regulations for certain cellular and gene
therapies.

    That means Cellcor must seek F.D.A. approval for its autolymphocyte therapy,
a medical procedure that uses the patient's blood cells to fight cancer. The
company said it would take a one-time charge of $2.3 million to pay for the
restructuring, and that its 1992 financial results would be restated to show a
loss of $12.5 million. Cellcor stock dropped 37.5 cents a share yesterday in
Nasdaq trading to close at $1.

LOAD-DATE: March 31, 1993


                             1218 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                     March 31, 1993 Wednesday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 8A

LENGTH: 392 words

HEADLINE: SCIENTISTS REPORT FIRST ANTI-CANCER GENE THERAPY

BYLINE: ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: SAN DIEGO

BODY:

   Scientists have developed the first medicines intended to stop malignancy by
disarming a rogue cancer gene, an approach that could help control many forms of
tumors.

   The new treatment is intended to block a cancer-causing gene - a so-called
oncogene - that appears to play a role in cancer of the breast and pancreas,
among other organs.

   Although the ultimate cause of cancer is often a mystery, scientists have
learned in recent years that mutations in several genes are critical steps on
the path to malignancy. When these normal genes go bad, cells lose control over
their growth, and cancer results.

   The latest approach is intended to short-circuit this process by attacking an
oncogene known in scientific shorthand as neu.

   At UCLA, Dr. Dennis J. Slamon has started safety testing of an antibody
intended to thwart the protein made by the neu gene's protein.

   Meanwhile, Dr. Mark I. Greene of the University of Pennsylvania, who is
developing a similar strategy, said it has shown great promise in tumor-prone
lab animals. He plans to begin testing it on people within a year.

   He said his animal studies provide "the first demonstration that one can
prevent genetically driven tumors."

   The neu oncogene makes a protein called P185. This plays a role in triggering
cells' uncontrolled growth. Greene's strategy is to fashion an antibody that
locks onto this protein and renders it harmless.

   "It opens up an approach for preventing breast cancer by a whole new
mechanism - by interfering with gene products," commented Dr. Victor Vogel of
the M.D. Anderson Cancer Center in Houston.

   Greene presented his findings yesterday at a meeting of the American Cancer
Society.

   Greene's team discovered the neu oncogene nearly a decade ago. He said it is
involved in about 30% of breast cancer. This is the second leading cause of
cancer death after lung cancer in women. It will claim about 46,000 lives this
year.

   Greene has experimented largely in mice that have been genetically
manipulated to develop a form of cancer indistinguishable from neu-related
breast cancer in people.

   Ordinarily, these animals get cancer at about 35 weeks of age. When the
researchers began treating them with anti-neu antibodies at about 6 weeks of
age, the appearance of cancer was delayed. Half of the mice did not development
malignancies at all.

LOAD-DATE: April 1, 1993


                             1219 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                           Times Publishing Company
                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                     March 30, 1993, Tuesday, City Edition

SECTION: FLORIDIAN; BREAKTHORUGHS; Discovery; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 806 words

HEADLINE: A tale that has a happy ending

BODY:


   For about 100 years, the giant lobster lived free off the New England coast
and grew to unusual proportions - 18 pounds and 30 inches.

   We're talking dinner for 20.

   When it was trapped not long ago, a television station saved it from that
fate, the New England Science Center promised it a 450-gallon home, and news
reports of the giant captivated young newspaper readers, including a group of
students in Brenda Interlandi's fourth-grade class at the Lake Myrtle
Elementary School in Land O'Lakes. They read Discovery every Tuesday.

   "I would like to know more about the lobster," young Megan Trudeau wrote  the
Times.

   So Discovery checked, and the news was good.

   When the weather warms, the giant lobster is going home.

   Pam Landry, associate curator of environmental field programs, reports the
giant is alive and well, burrowing in its tank. This spring, she says, it will
be released "as close to where it was caught as possible."

   Which all goes to prove, Megan, that when it comes to being a lobster, the
difference between big and small is the difference between freedom and, ah,
dinner.

   - CHRIS LAVIN, Discovery editor

Loosening cocaine's grip

Researchers reported Friday that they have found a way to split cocaine
molecules into inactive fragments in an effort to break the addictive grip of
the drug. "Passive immunization from such an artificial enzyme could provide  a
treatment for (cocaine) dependence by blunting reinforcement," the Columbia
University researchers reported in the current issue of the journal Science.
Reporting on laboratory studies using mice, the research team said the key to
their discovery is an artificial enzyme that they developed. Dr. Frank Vocci,
deputy director of medicine development at the national Institute on Drug
Abuse, described the development as a preliminary first step with much work
remaining to develop a treatment based on this work.

New test for prostate cancer

A new test aimed at determining how aggressively a cancerous prostate tumor  may
spread has been developed by a group of Seattle doctors who say it should  lead
to earlier detection and better treatment of the most common cancer among  men.
The test may dramatically improve doctors' ability to decide when and how  such
tumors should be treated.

Vaccine against malaria

Working in laboratories housed in Victorian-era hospital buildings in Bogota,  a
Colombian physician may have unexpectedly jumped to the front of a world  race
for a vaccine against one of the planet's deadliest diseases: malaria.  Dr.
Manuel Elkin Patarroyo and others report that a field trial involving  1,548
volunteers found a general protection rate of 38.8 percent against the  most
common and deadly form of malaria, Plasmodium falciparum, which causes  about 95
percent of malaria deaths worldwide. In children 1 to 4 years old,  who are the
most vulnerable to infection and death, protection rose to 77  percent. The rate
for adults over 45 years old was 67 percent. Immunity was  found to last from
one to three years.

Mandatory bike helmets

Making helmets mandatory for all bicyclists and explaining why it's important
to wear them may be the best way to lower U.S. cycling injuries and deaths,
federal health officials reported Thursday. There are about 96-million  American
cyclists, and every year bicycle injuries kill 950 of them and injure  another
580,000, says the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Head  trauma is
usually to blame.

Genetic breakthrough

The first success at putting large, working chunks of DNA into living animals
so the genes are reliably transmitted from one generation to the next was
announced recently by three competing research teams. The achievement, an
important goal in molecular genetics, surmounts a physical barrier that
hampered researchers' attempts to manipulate relatively large genes such as
those causing muscular dystrophy and hemophilia. The very size of such genes
made them too fragile to work with. The new technique means that pieces of DNA
25 times larger than before can be put into living cells, a possibility that
could aid the development of gene therapy. "With this new technology we can
address questions about genetic diseases and mammalian development that we
could not hope to answer in the past," said a member of one of the research
teams, molecular geneticist Rudolf Jaenisch. "It will speed up the discovery  of
genes."

   Longer versions of Breakthrough items can be obtained by mail or fax. Call
893-8176 from Pinellas County; outside Pinellas, (800) 333-7505, ext. 8176. Or
leave your request on the Discovery voice mail, 892-2310. Note: No longer
version of the lobster item.

GRAPHIC: COLOR PHOTO, New England Science Center; This 18-pound lobster will end
up in the ocean again, and not in a pot, thanks to a television report.

LOAD-DATE: April 2, 1993


                             1220 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1993 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle

                     MARCH 29, 1993, MONDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: DAILY DATEBOOK; Pg. E4; BOOKS

LENGTH: 644 words

HEADLINE: Diagnosing the Ills of U.S. Health System

BYLINE: Rebecca Buffum Taylor

BODY:

    Medicine at the Crossroads: The Crisis in Health Care

   By Melvin Konner Pantheon; 250 pages; $ 23
-----------------------------------------------------------------

   Melvin Konner has entered the health care debate with a unique voice.

   Author of ''The Tangled Wing'' and ''Becoming a Doctor,'' Konner brings a
doctor's sensibilities to the issues of health care in America, but he also
employs an anthropologist's willingness to explore other cultures for the wisdom
they might offer.

   In ''Medicine at the Cross roads,'' Konner surveys what he believes are the
primary culprits behind the health care crisis: declining trust between doctor
and patient, the thrust toward specialization, reliance on medical ''magic
bullets'' to treat lifestyle-related disease, the reach of gene therapy,
unnecessary surgeries, lack of social support for the mentally ill, the
illegality of assisted suicide, and the AIDS epidemic.

   POLICY WONKS

   But unlike the policy wonks who must analyze each issue economically to
detail its workable solution, Konner is free to take a broader, more humanistic
view of the ''tribe'' -- all of those involved in health care -- that he is
studying.

   When he explores the deteriorating patient-doctor relationship, Konner looks
to the culture of medical school. He writes of the ''Cadaver Shop'' where young
students have their ''first lesson in keeping emotional distance. This patient
would not nag us with questions, show fear or anger, or cry out and get
teary-eyed when something really hurt . . . By some lights we were dealing with
the very best patients we would ever have.'' One of the results, he contends, is
a widespread ''failure of compassion'' among American physicians.

   The undercurrent of Konner's book is his sense that, in its wonder and
pursuit of high-tech intervention, American medicine has lost sight of its
high-touch healing. In the United States, when schizophrenic and
manic-depressive patients are sent home from inpatient hospitals with a
prescription for antipsychotic drugs, they are ''discharged and ignored,'' he
contends, because many of them have no home to go to, and halfway houses and job
training are scarce.

   In contrast, he offers the Italian town of Bracciano, which openly adopted a
group of patients after their discharge from Santa Maria della Pieta, a
psychiatric hospital in Rome. As the facility's Dr. Tomasso Losavio told Konner,
''If these people are recognized as citizens of this village, the village itself
is transformed, because it becomes conscious of a reality which belongs to it .
. . '' How some cultures embrace an illness socially might be as critical to its
cure as medication or surgery.

   But AIDS, Konner asserts, is the most blatant challenge to a
technologically-driven medical system. He offers the Australian government's
socially progressive strategies as a more humane response to the epidemic --
including paying a salary to HIV-positive prostitutes if they stop working and
sending out explicit (and street-wise) booklets to kids and prison inmates --
prevention strategies that openly acknowledge social realities easier to ignore.

   'NEW PARADIGM'

   Konner quotes Jonathan Mann, former director of the World Health
Organization's AIDS prevention program, on the role AIDS has played in
redefining public health: ''The key to the new paradigm is the recognition that
behavior, both individual and collective, is the major public health challenge
of the future.''

   Konner is too short on analyses of the trial-balloon solutions being lofted
before the American people. Further, people already familiar with the thornier
issues within the health care debate or looking for insights into Hillary
Clinton's current policy debate should look elsewhere. But for anyone looking
for new perspectives on the health care crisis, it's a useful book, and an
unusual one.


GRAPHIC: PHOTO,Melvin Konner looks at health care in U.S. and other countries


                             1221 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 1993 Boston Herald Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                               The Boston Herald

                             March 28, 1993 Sunday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 693 words

HEADLINE: Discoveries don't mean cures will always follow

BYLINE: ROBERT WHITAKER

BODY:

   Even as medical researchers exult over the discovery of a gene for a disease,
they know that transforming this knowledge into a cure is a long, and even iffy,
process.

   That is particularly true for diseases of the central nervous system, such as
Lou Gehrig's disease (ALS) and Huntington's disease. Researchers announced in
the past month they had found the genes for both these diseases.

   "People are desperate to find a treatment" for these diseases, said Dr.
Joseph Higgins, a neurogenetics specialist at the National Institutes of Health.
"I worry that they think gene therapy is close. It is a ways off. There is a lot
of work to be done."

   The gene doctors can cite a handful of success stories. Two young girls sick
from adenosine deaminase deficiency, an inherited immune disorder, are doing
well more than two years after being given a transfusion of white blood cells
that had been genetically engineered to replace the missing gene. A gene-related
enzyme treatment has been devised for Gaucher's disease. And a variety of
gene-related therapies for cystic fibrosis are now in clinical trials.

   "We spent the previous decade developing techniques for finding genes," said
David Housman, a biologist at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, who
helped discover the Huntington's gene. "Now we are developing techniques to
intervene. But it takes time to develop them."

   After the raised hopes occasioned by the discovery of a gene, this wait for a
treatment can seem ever more difficult for those ill with a disease, or at risk
of developing it.

   Yet, at least among an area network of families affected by Huntington's,
there is an awareness that finding a cure could take years.

   "Now they can look for a way to correct what is wrong," said Natalie Frank of
Jamaica Plain, whose 31-year-old daughter, Claudia, has Huntington's. "I am sure
that it will be shorter than 10 years (to develop a treatment). We are
optimistic. But we know it is not going to be tomorrow."

   The difficulty of developing a treatment, or cure, for a gene-related disease
depends somewhat on the type of genetic defect. If the gene is simply missing,
or inactive, then researchers can try to discover the protein or enzyme that the
healthy gene codes for, and then manufacture a replacement enzyme. Such is the
approach that is working well with Gaucher's disease, and could be used for ALS.

   Finding a cure for the type of genetic mutation that causes Huntington's
disease is more problematic.

   Housman and the other researchers found the defective gene codes for a huge
protein, 3,000 amino acids long. The first step will be to determine what this
protein does, and how it adversely affects the cell.

   "You have to identify what has gone wrong with the cell metabolically,"
Housman said. "Has it poisoned the cell's energy metabolism? Its ability to make
new DNA? Blocked the cell's ability to respond to outside signals? Once you have
defined what's going wrong, then you can start interventions to block the
pathological process from proceeding."

   To do this research, the scientists can clone the gene and insert it into
animal cells in culture, or design "transgenic" mice with the defective gene.
These mice can then serve as models for the disease, and possible drug therapies
can be tested on them.

   A drug treatment, in a disease such as Huntington's, would not cure the
disease, but simply block the disease process. A more ambitious form of
treatment that could lead to a cure is delivering replacement genes to the
affected cells.

   This approach could be used with ALS.

   Yet, even if the replacement gene can be delivered to the targeted cells,
there is no guarantee it will begin working as desired, Higgins said.

   Housman said the public needs to be aware that there is going to be a lag
time of some years between the discovery of the gene for a disease, and any
effective treatment.

   "I would hope that the public understands that we are developing techniques
that are very powerful and have great promise to help alleviate very serious
diseases," he said. "But developing these methods is a long-term process that
requires steady and very determined activity on the part of scientists."

LOAD-DATE: March 16, 2007


                             1222 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1993 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            March 27, 1993 Saturday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-1:1,4; B-3:2; B-8:3

LENGTH: 970 words

HEADLINE: Gene-therapy patient due for key test in secrecy

BYLINE: DAVID GRAHAM, Staff Writer

BODY:

   A San Diego woman receiving gene therapy to treat a brain tumor is due for a
crucial test of the treatment's effectiveness, but her family has drawn a veil
of silence around developments. The 51-year-old patient has received three doses
of genetically altered cells in a highly publicized case that changed federal
health policy about the use of gene therapy. Her physicians at the San Diego
Regional Cancer Center have reached the point of undertaking a test that should
determine whether the therapy is boosting her immune system, which they believe
might then attack the tumor. The results of the test and information about how
the treatment will proceed will not be made public, the doctors said this week.
The patient's husband, who until recently sought public attention for and
understanding of the case and its policy implications, has instructed the gene
therapy physicians, Dr. Ivor Royston and Dr. Robert Sobol of the cancer center,
not to speak about how his wife is faring. In an interview, the husband, a
businessman and attorney, said he is weary of the attention.

   "I'm fed up with this stuff," he said. Until recently, the husband was
negotiating with a national television news program about airing his wife's
story. After a long bureaucratic debate last fall, Royston and Sobol received a
federal exemption in December to use the unproven gene therapy on a
compassionate basis, because the type of tumor the woman has is almost always
fatal and conventional treatments had failed to eradicate it. Altered cells,
injected into the patient's arm, carry a gene that produces interleukin-2, a
protein that doctors hope will stimulate activity of naturally occurring killer
T-cells, which are capable of destroying cancer cells.

   The doctors hope the cells will circulate through her bloodstream and attack
the tumor, but they say they have no evidence from experiments that it will. A
test that doctors previously said they expected to do late this week should show
whether the patient's immune response has been boosted.

   By exposing a sample of her blood to tumor cells that were extracted during
an earlier surgery, they hoped to determine whether immune agents in the blood
are attacking the cancerous cells. That result may indicate an increase in
activity of the killer T-cells or other substances that might be beneficial,
doctors said in interviews before being directed not to discuss the case any
further.

   It would be the first substantive measure of the treatment, they said.
Neither Royston nor Sobol would comment this week. "The family has said they no
longer want any publicity now," Sobol said. Earlier this month, Royston and
Sobol reported that the patient's condition was stable and that brain imaging
techniques indicated her tumor essentially had neither grown nor receded. To
preserve her privacy, The San Diego Union-Tribune is not reporting the woman's
name. It is unclear how the public will be able to learn the patient's fate or
evaluate the decision to allow the gene therapy to proceed if the doctors do not
speak about it. The physicians have no legal obligation to report back to the
National Institutes of Health (NIH) committee that oversees the use of gene
therapy in the United States, an NIH spokesman said. Royston and Sobol have said
they do make periodic safety reports to the U.S. Food and Drug Administration
(FDA), which also regulates gene therapy, but a spokesman said it is unclear how
much of that information can be made public.

   Some information filed with the FDA might be considered proprietary. Arthur
Caplan, who directs the Center for Biomedical Ethics at the University of
Minnesota, said the federal agency granting the compassionate use exemption
should require doctors to report back.

   That would allow the public a means to understand and evaluate the effects of
the policy decision. "Society is making it clear that it wants compassion and
the ability to waive rules in certain circumstance, but those should be linked
to explicit expectations about reporting and some some kind of comment through
the funding agency over time," Caplan said yesterday.

   "That feedback loop's not there, and it should be." The case continues to
attract national attention, with the San Diego Regional Cancer Center announcing
in a recent newsletter that it has received hundreds of inquiries from the
public about gene therapy, and with the patient's husband negotiating with the
ABC News program "PrimeTime Live." The television program was interested in his
wife's story, the husband said Thursday, but discussions apparently fell apart
when, among other issues, he wanted the entire hour-long program to be devoted
to his wife.

   He said ABC would not agree unless he at least allowed allow her to appear on
camera. The husband said he was willing to appear and be identified but wanted
to protect his wife.

   Representatives of the program also requested that he no longer talk to other
media about the story, he said. Efforts to reach representatives of "PrimeTime
Live" yesterday were unsuccessful. The television show and other media became
interested in the story in December during public meetings before an NIH
committee in Bethesda, Md. There, the patient's husband and her doctors sought
to change federal health policy that allowed gene therapy only after extensive
reviews. They argued that when other treatments had failed such therapy should
be approved on an exceptional basis. Supporters of the patient also solicited a
letter from Sen. Tom Harkin, D-Iowa, in support of their position and received a
boost when a senior official in the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
intervened to speed NIH review of the matter. The director of the NIH, Dr.
Bernadine Healy, bypassing the established review process, signed a waiver
allowing the gene therapy to go ahead.

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                             1223 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1993 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                     March 22, 1993, Monday, Final Edition

SECTION: FIRST SECTION; PAGE A2

LENGTH: 361 words

HEADLINE: Medicine: Gene Therapy for Cystic Fibrosis

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: David Brown

BODY:

   Scientists in England have corrected the key genetic flaw in the lungs of
mice with cystic fibrosis, although at this point it is unclear whether the
treatment could even temporarily "cure" the disease in mice or humans.

   CF sufferers have a genetic defect that interferes with digestive function
and causes thick mucus to form on the bronchial tubes, resulting in chronic lung
infections.

   Researchers at the Imperial Cancer Research Fund packaged a correct copy of
the "cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator" (CFTR) gene in oily
bubbles called liposomes, and then poured the mixture down the windpipes of the
mice. Tests several days later showed that cells lining the animals' airways had
taken up the gene and used it to make chloride ion channels, a type of cell
membrane structure largely missing in people with CF.

   The experiment, reported in the current Nature, represents one of the first
uses of the mouse "model" of CF developed less than a year ago.

   The animals, however, die of CF's intestinal complications before developing
lung disease. Consequently, there is no way of telling from this experiment
whether the technique would reverse lung symptoms, which are the main problem in
human CF.

   Meanwhile, researchers at the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute here
are awaiting government approval to perform a related experiment on people. They
will use a microbe called adenovirus, which selectively infects lung cells, to
carry in copies of the CFTR gene. Liposomes, in contrast, are far less efficient
delivery vehicles, and relatively large volumes would probably be necessary in
any clinically useful therapy for CF.

   "It's hard to reproduce what evolution has already figured out how to do so
well," Ronald G. Crystal, the physician leading the NHLBI team.

   Among the unanswered questions is whether the microbe will stimulate an
immune reaction in the chronically inflamed airways of CF patients.

   Even if the gene therapy works, it is unlikely to be a permanent cure. That
is because the cells lining the trachea and bronchi are shed every few months
and replaced by a new layer that would need the altered gene.

LOAD-DATE: October 14, 1993


                             1224 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                  March 21, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 13LI; Page 1; Column 5; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 2638 words

HEADLINE: Watson Relinquishes Major Role at Lab

BYLINE: By CAROL STRICKLAND

BODY:

   "I WAS 25 and too old to be unusual," Dr. James D. Watson ended his memoir
"The Double Helix: A Personal Account of the Discovery of the Structure of DNA."
Despite his resolve in a career spanning 40 years, the Nobel laureate, for a
discovery that changed the course of biology, could not help being unusual.

   The writer of five books and recipient of 15 honorary degrees and the
Presidential Medal of Freedom, Dr. Watson has directed the Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory for 25 years. Beginning next year, he will take over the new position
of president of the laboratory.

    As president, Dr. Watson, one of the most controversial scientists in the
country, will probably be more active in fund raising, leaving recruiting and
the directing of research to the new director, Dr. Bruce Stillman.

   Scientists gathered at the lab this month to celebrate the 40th anniversary
of the discovery of the structure of DNA, deoxyribonucleic acid, by Dr. Watson,
then 25, and Dr. Francis H. C. Crick, who was 37 at the time of their
breakthrough in 1953. They shared the Nobel in 1962 with Maurice H. F. Wilkins,
a British scientist whose data reinforced the discovery.

   One speaker after another praised their groundbreaking work and sketched the
possibilities growing out of the discovery of the blueprint for heredity, from
novel plants to gene therapy. The occasion highlighted not only Dr. Watson's
achievements, but also the future for him and the institution with which he is
identified.

'Most Golden of All Molecules'

    Drs. Watson and Crick, estranged after "The Double Helix" in 1968, have
reconciled. Dr. Crick had opposed the book's publication and threatened to sue
for libel, because of its personal rather than scholarly tenor. A candid account
of their pursuit of what Dr. Watson called "the most golden of all molecules,"
the book showed that self-interest as well as a search for truth motivated
scientists.

   The debunking of the myth of the selfless idealist aroused criticism from
scientists. Even today some have reservations. By glorifying competition, "the
book probably did a disservice to the profession," said Rich Roberts, director
of eukaryotic research at the New England Biolabs in Beverly, Mass.

   "I knew people would crucify me," Dr. Watson said, for mentioning "the whole
question of ambition."

   At the DNA birthday party, bygones were evidently bygone, however, as Dr.
Crick joined in the tributes.  Although known for refusing all requests for
interviews, he participated in a news conference.

   "Jim was the first person I met with the same set of interests," he said of
their initial encounter, when Dr. Watson was a postdoctoral fellow and Dr. Crick
was a graduate student in 1951. "Something about the way we thought about things
resonated."

   Without conducting a single experiment, the two solved the biggest scientific
mystery of the age. Their discovery changed the world of biology as profoundly
as did Darwin's theory of evolution or Mendel's explanation of heredity in the
19th century.

   After the insight that the DNA molecule was shaped like a double helix linked
by paired nucleotides, it was immediately obvious how the molecule reproduced
itself and passed on hereditary traits. The insight started the field of
molecular biology, which spawned the biotechnology industry and may lead to the
diagnosis, prevention and cure of many hereditary diseases.

   "The discovery was a major breakthrough in our understanding of life," said
Bruce Alberts, president-elect of the National Academy of Sciences and a
professor of biochemistry at the University of California in San Francisco.
"It's hard to imagine another breakthrough in biology of that magnitude."

   "I've had all these guilt feelings over the discovery," Dr. Watson said.
"It's taken 40 years to feel I'm almost justified."

   Drs. Watson and Crick instantly became the most famous living scientists.
"Did Francis and I deserve the double helix?" Dr. Watson asked.  "Yeah, we did."

   Dr. Watson will begin as president at Cold Spring Harbor in January, when Dr.
Stillman, now assistant director, succeeds him. Dr. Watson plans a six-month
sabbatical to write his autobiography.

   He gave a preview of the book in a speech reviewing the phases of his career,
student, scientist, teacher, director, bureaucrat and writer.

College Student at 15

    Dr. Watson, who was born on the South Side of Chicago, said of his
childhood, "I was born to like books, look at birds and to despise Republicans,
which was a wonderful background." A precocious child who read The World Almanac
for fun, the boy appeared on "The Quiz Kids" on radio and entered the University
of Chicago at age 15. There he developed his lifelong habit of questioning
orthodoxy. He graduated at 19, hoping to be an ornithologist.

   "My greatest ambition had been to find out why birds migrate," Dr. Watson
said. "It would have been a lost career. They still don't know."

   After reading "What Is Life?" by Erwin Schrodinger, he decided to uncover
what Dr. Crick called the "secret of life."

   "Goodbye bird migration," he said, "and on to the gene."

Paradise at Cold Spring Harbor

    While a graduate student, Dr. Watson spent the summer of 1948 at Cold Spring
Harbor, eating peanut butter and doing research. "There was only one question,"
he said. "What was the gene? It was paradise."

   After earning a Ph.D. from Indiana University, Dr. Watson had his fateful
encounter with Dr. Crick at the Cavendish Laboratory of Cambridge University.
"I'm sure Francis and I talked about guessing the structure of DNA within the
first half-hour of our meeting," Dr. Watson remembered.  "Francis did all the
thinking, and I had sort of the goal."

   Most of their colleagues thought they were crazy, Dr. Watson said, because
"we weren't obeying the rules." They spent lavish periods of time boating,
taking walks and cavorting in bars. Yet their scientific single-mindedness paid
off when the fledglings beat their rival, Linus Pauling, to the discovery
through constructing a Tinkertoy model of the structure.

   In 1956, Dr. Watson joined the Harvard faculty, because, he said, "I wanted a
wife." It was there he met a Radcliffe student who became his wife of 25 years,
Elizabeth Watson.

Revitalization of Lab

    In 1968 he became director of Cold Spring Harbor, which was on shaky
financial footing and was primarily known for acting as the host of meetings and
giving courses for visiting scientists. Money had grown so tight that many
buildings were condemned, and the milkman refused to make deliveries.

   In his 25 years Dr. Watson revitalized the lab, expanding its revenues, size,
staff, productivity, and reputation. "Jim completely rebuilt a rundown dying lab
into a tasteful modern scientific institution," said Dr. Norton Zinder,
professor of molecular genetics at the Rockefeller University in Manhattan.

   An amazingly effective fund raiser, Dr. Watson built the endowment from
virtually nonexistent to $83 million. The physical plant tripled in size, and
staffing increased, from 30 research scientists in 1972 to nearly 200 today. The
annual operating budget increased, from $1 million to $36.9 million. Attendance
at meetings and courses grew, from 1,000 20 years ago to 5,500 last year.

   "Jim has basically taken the lab from a very impoverished to a very affluent
institution," said Rich Roberts, a former staff scientist at Cold Spring Harbor.


Retaining Touches of Quaint

    Despite adding housing, meeting rooms and lab space, including, in 1991, a
$21.6 million building for neuroscience, the complex "looks like a whaling
village, which is what it was," said Dr. Stillman. Credit for transforming
buildings into modern facilities without losing the atmosphere goes to Mrs.
Watson, an architectural historian.

   "Cold Spring Harbor used to be quaint," said Dr. Harold Varmus, a Nobel
laureate and professor of microbiology and biochemistry at the University of
California at San Francisco. "The town is still quaint, but the meeting room is
splendid, and the labs are modern. There was a certain rustic charm to the old
place. But it's awfully nice to have a reasonable place to stay."

   Dr. Watson also undertook the scientific recovery of the lab. Focusing on
tumor virology at the time that President Richard M. Nixon announced a war on
cancer, Dr. Watson tapped Federal funds and hired a coterie of young scientists.
Their work led to discoveries in the molecular basis of cancer and genetic
engineering.

   "It's been a pretty spectacular 25 years," said Dr. Stillman, 39, a respected
scientist who has just been elected to the Royal Society of London because of
his work on DNA replication. "It's one of the places where molecular biology, as
we know it, was developed."

   "Jim built Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory from quite a sleepy place to one of
the major labs," said Dr. Alberts.

   "The lab is small only in terms of population and dollars," said Dr. David
Botstein, professor of genetics at the Stanford University School of Medicine.
"It's not small in any other parameter. If you look at a list of the most
productive scientific establishments in terms of citations of the work and other
objective measurements, Cold Spring Harbor is up there at the very top."

   "He has given his heart and soul to the lab," said George W. Cutting Jr.,
former chairman of the Long Island Biological Association, a fund-raising group
that has been renamed the Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Association.

   "Jim earned the Nobel Prize when he was young enough that he didn't
immediately head for a wheelchair, but used the prestige to do good and get
access to Government and industry," said Gerald R. Fink, director of the
Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research at the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology. In fact, by the time of the Nobel, Dr. Watson had essentially
withdrawn from active research.

   "He had made his contribution and could probably never top it, so he didn't
try to run a lab," Dr. Roberts said. "He focused all his energies on running
Cold Spring Harbor."

Appeal for Iconoclasts

    Just as Dr. Watson honed in on DNA, he has a radarlike ability to spot
up-and-coming researchers. "He's attracted absolutely first-rate young
scientists to the lab," said Dr. Fink. A key to his appeal for Young Turks is
"disrespect for established older people in the profession," Dr. Fink said,
adding, "His boyish idealism and angry young man aspect strike the fancy of
young iconoclasts and make them think he's on their side."

   One problem with young talent is that after emerging stars blossom, larger
institutions lure them away.

   Dr. Stillman portrayed this hemorrhaging of staff as a sign of health.  "We
don't like to lose very productive scientists," he said. "But one strength of
the lab is its turnover, which brings in fresh blood."

   In addition to his eye for talent, Dr. Watson is prescient in backing
promising areas of research. He is betting on neurobiology, committing
considerable funds to it.

   "Nobody argues it's not a worthwhile endeavor, but whether it's the best use
of resources rather than pushing forward with what they're already good at makes
it a very ambitious gamble," Dr. Alberts said. "No other director would have
done that, but Jim's intuition is almost always right."

   As an educator, Dr. Watson has made substantial contributions.  " 'The
Molecular Biology of the Gene' revolutionized the writing of textbooks," Dr.
Varmus said.

   Dr. Watson also initiated the first curriculum, promoted by the DNA Learning
Center at Cold Spring Harbor, to teach modern molecular biology in high schools.
Dr. Alberts conceded that he initially thought "taking high school students
right to the cutting edge of modern biology was a little bit nuts." But after
seeing how it "motivated students to learn more about biology," he became a
convert, he added.

No Cars, but Big Funds Anyway

    Dr. Watson's visions require substantial funds. "No one could have predicted
he'd be that good at raising money," Dr. Fink said.

   "He's not verbally adept," Dr. Alberts said. "He could never sell cars."

   Dr. Watson is known for some eccentricities, including electrified hair and
chronically untied shoelaces.  Many acquaintances swear that they have seen him
untie his shoelaces purposely before meeting a potential donor to project the
image of a distracted scientist.

   "He's not like everyone else, so people pay attention," Dr. Fink said. "He
says things off the wall, but for that reason, you look at the wall."

   Charles F. Dolan, chairman of the Cablevision Systems Corporation and a
member of the Cold Spring Harbor board, said: "Jim absolutely says what he
thinks. If that does any damage, there's always Liz around."

   Under Dr. Watson the lab has enjoyed support from individuals on the North
Shore. As the lab began its second century of operation in 1990, a fund-raising
campaign netted $50 million, primarily for capital expansion.

   "You have to like people who have money," Dr. Watson said as part of the job
description for director. "I really like rich people."

   The institution enriches Long Island in return, Mr. Dolan, a major
contributor, said, adding: "It's helpful to the Island, because, in a sense it
creates our own little Silicon Valley or Route 128. It gives Long Island the
image of a professional center."

   Federal grants supply almost 40 percent of the lab's budget. In light of
"growing limits with the Federal Government's budget stringency," the president
of the trustees, David Luke 3d, said, donations will be crucial in underwriting
activities.

   One setback in a career of nearly unbroken triumphs was Dr. Watson's
dismissal last year as director of the Human Genome Project of the National
Institutes of Health. From 1988 to 1992, Dr. Watson led the ambitious
undertaking to map and sequence an estimated 100,000 human genes in 15 years at
a cost of $3 billion.

   "Why did I get fired?" Dr. Watson asked. "The answer is pretty simple.
Bernardine Healy was totally incompetent."

Clash Over Biotech and N.I.H.

    The director of the N.I.H., Dr. Healy, and Dr. Watson clashed when Dr.
Watson labeled her decision to patent gene sequences "sheer lunacy." When a
biotechnology entrepreneur objected to Dr. Watson's holding stock in
biotechnology companies, calling it a conflict of interest, Dr. Healy referred
the matter to the ethics office of the Health and Human Services Department. Dr.
Watson resigned in protest.

   Dr. Healy's office responded with the statement for Dr. Watson's resignation,
calling him "an historic figure in the annals of molecular biology."

   Although his departure was abrupt, his leadership was crucial in starting the
project. "Jim played a critical role in getting the genome project off the
ground and helping to defend it in its early days, when it was not looked on
very favorably by some in the scientific community," Dr. Zinder, former chairman
of the N.I.H. Program Advisory Committee on the Human Genome, said.

   "I completely failed the test," Dr. Watson said of his experience as a
Government bureaucrat. He advised anyone holding a post in Washington to "take a
sleeping pill when you appear in public, because you've got to look up to
Congressmen, which means you've got to be pretty low."

   As Dr. Watson turns his energies to writing and withdraws from the day-to-day
management, questions arise about how the lab will fare without its leading
light.

   "Because of the strength he's built up financially and through its service
programs like meetings, courses and publications, the lab will continue to be
secure, considering it's built around one charismatic figure," Dr. Botstein
said. "Whether it has the same creative push Jim could give, only time will
tell. It's asking too much of anyone to replace Jim."

GRAPHIC: Photos: Dr. James D. Watson (Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory) (pg. 1);
Dr. James D. Watson, above at left, and Dr. Francis H. C. Crick in 1968 with a
model of the double helix (Atheneum Publishing); Left, Dr. Bruce Stillman, the
new director of the lab. (Margot Bennett/Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory) (pg. 11)

LOAD-DATE: March 21, 1993


                             1225 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1993 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                    March 21, 1993, Sunday, TWO STAR EDITION

SECTION: EDITORIAL, Pg. B1

LENGTH: 2149 words

HEADLINE: WE'RE ALL GONNA DIE;
UNIVERSAL HEALTH COVERAGE IS A) UNREALISTICALLY EXPENSIVE OR B) JUST PLAIN;
UNREALISTIC.

BYLINE: ROBERT WRIGHT

BODY:


   Last month Hillary Rodham Clinton made her first rhetorical splash as
health-policy czar. At a conference in Harrisburg, she pledged to start the
nation on ''the march toward facing reality.'' We must, she said, ''face up to
the costs in this system, and we have to have the courage to talk about that
openly.''

   What is this tough reality that we must courageously face? Good question.
Clinton seems to be asking for courage from a pretty small group --
pharmaceutical executives and others in the health-care industry who seem to
make too much money. In Harrisburg the closest she came to asking for broad
sacrifice was to say that Americans should lead healthier lives -- quit smoking,
drink less, etc.

   No doubt there is money to be saved by squeezing fat and some profit out of
the health-care industry -- and maybe, too, by discouraging smoking through sin
taxes. But it looks increasingly as if, in the long run, the only way to control
costs is to ask Americans for courage in a truer sense of the word: the courage
to forgo medical treatments whose social costs outweigh their individual
benefits.

   Health care will consume a growing share of economic output until the ethos
of the medical profession changes from infinite sympathy to zero-sum utilitarian
calculus. The word politicians are loathe to say in public is ''rationing.''

   But they may have to start saying it in private, within the confines of the
administration's task force on health-care reform. For in the absence of some
mechanism for rationing, the cost of a universal health-care package will be
extremely, perhaps prohibitively, high. If Bill Clinton truly wants to give
health coverage nationwide breadth, he will probably have to limit its depth.

   Even if we somehow dodge this trade-off for the time being, we'll have
trouble escaping it in the long run. It is pressed upon us by basic
technological forces that show no signs of abating: the relentless creation of
ever more subtle and ever more expensive treatments for an ever expanding array
of maladies.

   Coping with this trend through rationing -- making hard choices about the
quality of people's lives, and even about who gets to live -- won't be a
pleasant enterprise. But surely it's preferable to the only likely alternative:
a world in which the market remains the primary rationer and an ever-rising
standard of physical well-being leaves low-income Americans entirely behind.

   The case for rationing begins with the nature of health insurance. It is
common to blame the profligate use of medical technology on lawyers who sue
unless every conceivable diagnostic test has been done. And certainly
''defensive medicine'' is a problem. But a larger problem is that patients often
want every conceivable diagnostic test done, because they have to pay, at most,
a small faction of the cost.

   Thirty years ago this insulation had little consequence, because medicine
offered few exotic technologies. Today it offers many: magnetic resonance
imaging (about $ 1,000); artificial hips ($ 20,000); coronary bypasses ($
20,000); organ transplants ($ 100,000 or higher); bone-marrow transplants
(around $ 100,000 and they're often futile); a genetically engineered drug
called Ceredase (up to hundreds of thousands of dollars per year) for a rare
illness called Gaucher's disease. And so on.

   In his book ''Serious and Unstable Condition: Financing America's Health
Care,'' Henry Aaron of the Brookings Institution shows that these sorts of
technological advances greatly outweigh all other factors commonly blamed for
rising health-care costs, such as the aging of the population and malpractice
litigation. And William B. Schwartz of the University of Southern California,
co-author with Aaron of the 1984 book ''The Painful Prescription: Rationing
Hospital Care,'' has demonstrated that many cost-cutting measures other than
rationing have largely run their course.

   While cutting costs -- in doctors' salaries, pharmaceutical profits, etc. --
will partly negate the rising cost of technology, overall spending may level
out. But you can't keep cutting these things indefinitely. As technological
forces return to center stage, overall spending growth returns to previous
levels. It's fine to cut out fat, but unless that fat has been growing -- unless
it is part not just of overall costs but of annual increases in overall costs --
cutting it will have no long-term effect on the rate of cost increases.

   This principle may provide a rude awakening for advocates of ''managed
competition,'' the program the Clinton administration has favored. Much of the
program's theorized savings would come from encouraging HMO-style care --
partnerships of doctors, hospitals and insurers that compete for customers on
the basis of price and service. This may be a good idea, since HMOs seem cheaper
than fee-per-service coverage (though some suspect this is only because
relatively healthy people opt for HMOs).

   But once you've got costs down to HMO levels, what do you do next? As Aaron
and Schwartz note, the rate of increase of HMO costs has historically been
almost indistinguishable from the rate of increase for conventional insurance.
So managed competition will at best bring a few years of the illusory savings,
after which we're back on the technological escalator, if a few steps lower than
before.

   As both Aaron and Schwartz stress, the list of exotic new medical
technologies is not a list of things that should be banned. In some cases MRIs
have a good chance of revealing a brain tumor. The trick is to tell when they
don't, and to get doctors to forgo them. At least, that's half the trick; the
other half is to admit that every once in a while -- however good your
guidelines for MRI use -- they'll lead you astray, and a brain tumor will go
undetected.

   Even with this admission, diagnostic technology is relatively easy to curtail
without losing sleep. The more uncomfortable questions come when the treatment
stands a reasonable chance of success but the meaning of ''success'' is
debatable.

   If a cardiac defibrillator prevents heart attacks in a generally healthy
55-year-old, yielding another 15 or 20 years of robust life, that's success by
any definition. But what about a 70-year-old with bad kidneys and lungs? Is his
body a good place for society to invest $ 40,000? Do you want to be the one to
tell him it's not?

   There are people who actually try to answer such questions, assessing
treatment costs in terms of QALYS, or ''quality-adjusted life years.'' In
Britain, where health care has long been universal and rationed, academics have
compiled ''QALY league tables'' which, for example, put the cost of a kidney
transplant for a given patient at $ 4,350 per QALY, whereas dialysis would cost
$ 20,300 per QALY.

   One complaint about Oregon's plan to control health-care costs, the revised
version of which was unveiled this week, is that it rations health care only
below the poverty line; the well-to-do would still have had a full menu of
treatments. Drawing this boundary at the poverty line isn't a necessary feature
of rationing, of course, but it is true that rationing won't, in the real world,
apply to everyone. The affluent are always willing to pay for things insurance
doesn't cover.

   And banning that discretion seems to be politically impossible. (How many
Americans, even lower-middle-class Americans, want to be told that they can't
use their hard-earned money however they want if their son or daughter is ill?)
In Britain and other countries with rationing, escape hatches exist.

   The choice we face, then, may come down to this: (a) a future in which health
care is universal but escape hatches from rationing create gross disparities
between rich and poor; or (b) a future with no rationing, but no universal
health care, and thus grosser disparities between rich and poor -- that is, a
future much like the present.

   Advocates of universal health care may manage to ignore this dilemma in the
near future. It's possible, they can say, to provide full coverage for everyone
without rationing. Maybe so. Though the cost would badly dent Clinton's fiscal
plans.

   Of course, there's always the hope for a miracle cure, hope that technology
will solve the crisis it has created. As biotechnology makes medical
interventions less elaborately mechanical and more molecular, couldn't treatment
get cheaper?

   This hope is almost sure to be dashed. Still, the dashing is of an
instructive sort.

   Biotechnology certainly could lower the costs of some treatments. Consider
gene therapy, in which defective cells -- blood cells, brain tumor cells -- are
corrected by amending their DNA. (Now in experimental stages, gene therapy is
still unthinkably expensive, and it will never be dirt cheap.) In the case of
cancer, now treated capital-intensively, labor-intensively and often
unsuccessfully, the eventual savings from an effective gene therapy could be
large. Researchers also have high hopes for human-growth hormone, which in tests
has strengthened muscles, reduced body fat and generally restored some vigor to
internal organs.

   All this sounds wonderful. But look more closely. First of all, those
postponed organ failures will come home to roost at some point. And other
failures, not postponed by HGH (Alzheimer's disease, say), will keep
accumulating. So treatment for the elderly will still be more costly than
treatment for the young. As HGH, like all life-extending treatments, increases
the elderly fraction of the population, total health-care costs will grow.

   There is an even larger problem with miracle cures. True, HGH and gene
therapy may reduce the cost of particular treatments. But, like so much medical
technology, they also expand the range of the treatable, making more and more
maladies targets of health care. In an important sense, they redefine health
itself, making it a more expensive concept.

   Technology has long been driving up expenses by increasing not just the cost
of treatment, but its breadth. There is no doubt that biotechnology will offer
an expanding range of finer and finer tunings of our physical selves, raising
the threshold of ''normal'' health.

   And finer tunings of our mental selves. Designer drugs will increasingly go
beyond the correction of severe mental illness and offer to make people a bit
more serene, say, or more gregarious -- without the self-defeating side effects
of sedatives, stimulants and other crude drugs of past generations. Memory
capacity, verbal fluency, math skills -- all are likely to respond to the
manipulation of brain chemistry.

   With mental as with physical ''health,'' we are headed toward an era when
medicine makes people not just healthily human, but healthier than humans,
raising them above the frailties to which our species has always been heir. If
lines aren't drawn in, if the concept of ''health'' isn't somehow circumscribed,
medical costs will grow forever.

   Rationing health care would have the added virtue of slowing this whole
process down. Health insurance distorts investment patterns. By giving Americans
more elaborate care than they would buy if they felt the true costs, it signals
capital markets to divert more resources toward the development of medical
technology than America actually ''wants.''

   Managed competition, though probably not the best vehicle for rationing,
could accommodate it. For example, HMO-type organizations could be given austere
budget limits and told to divvy up finite medical resources with costs and
benefits in mind. Presumably local ethical committees, equipped with QALY tables
and reams of other statistics, would help with the tougher choices.

   Budget caps are said to have support within the administration's health- care
task force. The questions are whether they'd be low enough to entail rationing
and how explicit the rationing would be. Bill Clinton's sentiments remain
unclear, but he has said he favors caps of some magnitude, and he is willing to
let Oregon proceed with its rationing plan.

   During the campaign, when pressed on whether Clinton favored rationing, his
spokesmen typically responded, ''We already ration health care'' by keeping it
from the poor. True -- indeed, that's the crux of the argument for rationing --
but evasive. It will soon be time for Bill Clinton, and Hillary Rodham Clinton,
to come clean and tell us whether they do or don't support rationing.

   Hiding behind ambiguities -- whether ''budget caps'' or ''tough decisions''
-- may work for now. But if the administration's health-care plan really does
confront rising costs, there won't be time for any more coyness. Word about the
true meaning of stringent budget caps will reach Americans one way or another.
If the word doesn't come from the administration, early and forthrightly,
they're not likely to be in a mood to summon much courage.

GRAPHIC: DRAWING, Daniel Marsula/Post-Gazette

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 1995


                             1226 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1993 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                     March 19, 1993, Friday, Valley Edition

SECTION: Valley Life; Page 23

LENGTH: 759 words

HEADLINE: GREAT EXPECTATIONS;
DISCOVERY OF THE GENE BELIEVED TO CARRY ALS PROMPTS OPTIMISM THAT THERAPIES WILL
BE DEVELOPED.

BYLINE: By MICHAEL ARKUSH, TIMES STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   John Taylor lost his wife and two sons to amyotrophic lateral sclerosis --
ALS -- and has feared for years that his twin daughters would be the next
victims.

   Two weeks ago, doctors identified the gene believed to carry the disease in
some cases, which results in muscle wasting, paralysis and death. Taylor read
the news with mixed emotions.

   "I'm very happy about what this means for the people who could get ALS," said
Taylor, 68, of Chatsworth. "But I'm sad that it didn't come soon enough to save
my family."

   Taylor's reaction is typical of family members who watched helplessly as
their loved ones gradually lost muscle movement and died. ALS, or Lou Gehrig's
disease, named after the former New York Yankee first baseman who had to quit
the game when he got sick, was first identified in 1869.

   The breakthrough earlier this month is unquestionably the most important
research development about the condition. Doctors believe that effective
therapies might be developed within six months or a year.

   "We have found the mutations," said Dr. Teepu Siddique of Northwestern
Medical School in Chicago, who, along with Dr. Robert H. Brown of Massachusetts
General Hospital in Boston, led the team of 29 other researchers at 13
institutions in the United States. Siddique said doctors must perform many more
tests before figuring out which therapies would be safe.

   The gene discovery has provided a much-needed boost of optimism at the
Woodland Hills-based ALS Assn., a national, nonprofit organization that counsels
victims and family members, raises funds for research and serves as an
information source for the medical profession.

   "We're walking eight or 10 feet off the ground," said Lynn Klein, the
association's vice president. "When you're dealing with a disease with no cure
and everybody you've heard who has it dies, some days are really hard because
you feel so negative. Now, we've been re-energized. I've been calling families
and getting all choked up."

   In the first two days after the medical announcement, Klein said, the group
received about 500 calls from people with ALS, or family members who wanted to
know how to get tested for the gene and when therapies might be introduced.
Normally, the association takes that many calls per month.

   The ALS Assn., formed locally in 1985 because the then-president was a native
Californian, has 27 chapters throughout the country and has established more
than 100 support groups in 38 states, including five in Los Angeles County --
Long Beach, Manhattan Beach, Pasadena, Northridge and Santa Monica. The national
headquarters employs a staff of 16 in a office building on Ventura Boulevard.

   To capitalize on the excitement generated by the research findings, the group
quickly drafted a new fund-raising letter, hoping to collect more than the
approximate $3 million it now raises annually from private donations.

   "We feel a real ownership to this," Klein said.

   So does John Taylor. His two sons -- one of whom died in 1988, the other in
1989 -- made sure that their body parts were donated for the research effort.
His wife died in 1985.

   Yet, despite the new hope, Klein warns against too much optimism.

   "We are telling people to keep this in perspective," she said. "It's
important to realize this is not a cure. There is still a lot more research to
be done."

   Klein explained that the gene finding only relates to about half the people
who contract the "familial" ALS, which is about 5% to 10% of the about 5,000
cases diagnosed annually. The majority of victims acquire "sporadic" ALS, which
strikes randomly, although scientists are confident that the breakthrough will
eventually affect those cases, as well.

   Laura Ziegler, 36, has no trouble with perspective. Last year, she began
suffering the same symptoms of ALS, but has not been officially diagnosed -- a
distinction that she considers irrelevant. She is hooked up to a ventilator and
must talk in sync with the cycle of the machine. Eleven of her relatives died of
familial ALS.

   "I'm scared that it's not really going to help anyone," said Ziegler, of Los
Angeles, who has seen her hope dashed before by inconclusive findings.

   Added her husband, Doug Ziegler: "We've both taken biology classes, and we
know the reality that it will take awhile before they can pin this down and come
up with a therapy. There is still no treatment."

   Yet there is a sense of hope in the Ziegler household. "We feel very
confident that our children won't die as a result of this," said Doug Ziegler.
"And that feels good."

GRAPHIC: Photo, Lynn Klein, vice president of the ALS Assn., stands with a
display of Lou Gehrig memorabilia. ALS forced Gehrig to quit baseball. ; Photo,
(Page 2) Reason for hope.  SCOTT RATHBURN / For The Times


                             1227 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1993 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                    March 18, 1993, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 576 words

HEADLINE: COME ON, COME ON

BYLINE: Arlene Vigoda

BODY:

    COME ON, COME ON: Believe it or not, "What's your sign?" and "Don't I know
you from somewhere?" are still among the quintessential pick-up lines bartenders
hear these days, according to a survey in which 2,000 mixmeisters were asked to
name the most amusing lines overheard on the job. Women fancy using refrains
like, "What's a guy like you doing without me in your world?" and "I'm looking
for a strong guy to flip my mattress." But most of the looking-for-love chatter
is initiated by guys with such top-o'-the-line lines as "You must be related to
cupid because you're breaking my heart," "If I don't find someone I like and
marry her by next Friday, I'll lose a large inheritance," and the ever-popular
"Excuse me but did you happen to find my Congressional Medal of Honor?" Yup,
those come-ons would certainly quicken my heartbeat.
THE STARS ARE OUT: An A-list Hollywood group has formed the Motion Picture and
Television Fund Foundation, to be headed by Walt Disney Studios chairman Jeffrey
Katzenberg. The foundation's board of directors will raise funds to provide
health and child care services to people in the entertainment industry. The
who's who in show biz board includes: Warren Beatty, Annette Bening, David
Geffen, Whoopi Goldberg, Michael Ovitz, Arnold Schwarzenegger, John Singleton
and Steven Spielberg.

   TV REUNION: The cast and crew of Mission: Impossible will reunite Friday at
the Los Angeles County Museum to answer questions from fans of the defunct
television show. The event coincides with the release of The Best of Mission:
Impossible - Then and Now on GNP Crescendo. The instrumental 33-track CD,
produced by Neil Norman, features music from the original series (1966-73) and
the short-lived successor (late 1988-90).

   LOW NOTE: Luciano Pavarotti's planned comeback hit a snag Wednesday. He
canceled an April 1 Milan appearance in Pagliacci at La Scala because of a knee
problem that may require surgery. The Italian tenor, who was booed when he
performed Don Carlo at La Scala's gala Dec. 7, sent a medical certificate that
said he will be unable to sing in April because of knee pains.

   FOR ART'S SAKE: Coca-Cola has become the first corporate contributor to the
legendary Hermitage Museum in St. Petersburg, Russia, which historically has
been funded by government monies. Recent changes in the country have
significantly cut funding; Coke's $ 320,000 grant will be dedicated to the
conservation and restoration of works of art in the institution's collection.

   ROLLING ON THE RIVER: Entertainer Merv Griffin has come to the rescue of
recession-hit Metropolis, Ill. The entrepreneur has launched Players Riverboat
Casino from Merv Griffin's Landing on the Ohio River. The $ 18.5 million project
is expected to provide the southern Illinois town with $ 13 million in revenue
and employment for 800 people.

   CF STUDY: English researchers have used an aerosol spray to correct a disease
that acts like cystic fibrosis in mice, today's Nature reports. The findings
"illustrate the feasibility of gene therapy" for treating humans, says the team
from Oxford and Cambridge universities. Cystic fibrosis occurs in about 1 in
2,000 births; its effects on the lungs shorten sufferers' lives and half die
before their mid-20s. In the last four years, scientists have located the
defective gene that results in CF and the cause of mucus buildup in the lungs -
improper transport of chloride and sodium in airways.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, color, Rob Brown, USA TODAY

LOAD-DATE: October 05, 1994


                             1228 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1993 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            March 17, 1993 Wednesday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A-1

LENGTH: 611 words

HEADLINE: UCSD, Scripps hold talks on a joint cancer center

BYLINE: REX DALTON, Staff Writer

BODY:

   UCSD and the Scripps organization are expected to announce today negotiations
to develop a joint cancer center in La Jolla. Dr. Charles C. Edwards, chief
executive of the Scripps Institutions of Medicine and Science, said last night
the two have agreed on a strategic plan and want to discuss what common goals
they can build upon in the area of cancer research and treatment. "I think that
this is the best thing that has happened in a long time," Edwards said.

   "I'm not saying that it is 100 percent certain" that a full agreement can be
reached.

   "But it is a step in the right direction." The discussions come at a
sensitive time for UCSD and Scripps, since the university is close to opening
its new Thornton Hospital in La Jolla near two key Scripps facilities -- Scripps
Memorial Hospital and the Scripps Clinic and Research Foundation on Torrey Pines
Mesa. The presence of the Thornton Hospital has raised deep concerns among
Scripps physicians and officials, who are worried about a state-funded
institution competing more directly with them on their home turf. UCSD and
Scripps have hired a consultant who has drawn up a strategic plan, Edwards said.

   A council of representatives from all the institutions has been appointed to
serve as a steering group. The planning will involve UCSD's cancer facilities as
well as those at Scripps Memorial and Scripps Clinic, he said. For the near
future, Edwards said, the various facilities would operate their own cancer
centers, but eventually "all may be merged." "You don't just do something like
this in one fell swoop," Edwards said. UCSD is a National Cancer
Institute-designated center for both patient care and basic research.

   Scripps is not.

   The two other NCI-designated facilities in San Diego -- the Salk Institute
and La Jolla Cancer Center -- do only basic research. One of the key areas that
might evolve from the UCSD-Scripps discussions would be a bone marrow transplant
program that would share some facilities or services.

   Scripps and UCSD both operate bone marrow transplant programs, and the
facilities have been expanding and increasing the types of therapies these
programs provide for patients with cancer, blood diseases and other illnesses.
UCSD, for instance, brought in a new head of the bone marrow transplant program,
Dr. Anthony D. Ho, last August.

   Scripps Clinic -- which has had a part-time head of its bone marrow
transplant program, Dr. R. Robert McMillan -- is recruiting a new full-time
chief of bone marrow transplantation, officials have said. Both UCSD and Scripps
officials have said they hope to avoid a situation where they have dueling bone
marrow transplant programs across the freeway from each other in La Jolla.

   UCSD's bone marrow transplantation program is now housed at UCSD Medical
Center in Hillcrest, but it is expected to be moved to the Thornton Hospital
once that opens in coming months. Any joint program the hospitals develop also
could have broader application of new therapies, in particular the use of gene
therapy, in treating cancer and other disease. If the agreement goes ahead,
Edwards said, we hope to "do things with other programs." In years past, UCSD
and Scripps have discussed embarking on joint programs that have not come to
fruition. Industry observers and officials from the two organizations, speaking
privately, have said those efforts failed because of the intense competition
between the two institutions. Some observers may ask whether the talks are
designed to blunt any criticism that UCSD's new $90 million Thornton Hospital
will be duplicating services already offered in La Jolla and the North Coast
through Scripps and other organizations.

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                             1229 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                           Times Publishing Company
                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                     March 16, 1993, Tuesday, City Edition

SECTION: FLORIDIAN; BREAKTHROUGHS; Discovery; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 879 words

HEADLINE: A bird colonel?

BODY:


   Some forest-dwelling birds in India display a trait familiar to any Army
veteran: the more conspicuous the stripes on their wings, the more they can
boss other birds around, a study says. When the yellow wing bars of the small

greenish warblers were enlarged with a little paint, they were able to get
bigger territories. Researcher Karen Marchetti used the yellow paint on some
Phylloscopus inornatus males, green paint to shrink the bars on others and
clear paint on still other males for comparison. The work was done while the
males were establishing territories. Birds with the enlarged wing bars ended  up
with territories averaging about six-tenths of an acre, about 25 percent  larger
than the birds with unaffected stripes got and more than twice the  territory of
birds with reduced bars. Overall, the findings suggest that  differences in
environment can promote creation of different species, said  Marchetti, a
student at the University of California, Davis.

Defect linked to asthma

People who suffer from severe asthma have a faulty gene that blocks the
effectiveness of commonly prescribed drugs for the ailment, University of
Cincinnati researchers have found. The breakthrough research could lead to the
development of better medicine for severe-asthma sufferers. "If you have this
gene, and you have asthma, you'll have much worse asthma," said Dr. Stephen
Liggett, a molecular geneticist and director of the UC Asthma Center. Liggett
and other researchers found that, in patients with severe asthma, the genetic
mutations were nearly always present. Liggett said the discovery is the first
to show a genetic defect linked to asthma, one of the most common of all
illnesses.

Cancer and cryotherapy

A new experimental treatment that destroys deadly liver cancer tumors by
freezing them has shown promising results, doctors said last week. More than  40
patients have had inoperable cancer lesions eradicated by the procedure,  known
as cryotherapy, since last June, according to Dr. Kenneth Ramming,  associate
director of the John Wayne Cancer Institute. None has developed any  signs of
new cancer cells, he said. "It's too early to say what their  long-term survival
rates will be, but the results we've seen so far are very  encouraging,"
Ramming, who heads the surgical team, said. He said the  treatment could bring
new hope to tens of thousands of people diagnosed with  liver cancer each year.


Switched-on gene

Scientists have isolated a gene that fights viral infections and possibly
cancer, raising the possibility that new therapies can be developed, the
Cleveland Clinic Foundation said. The research was published Friday in the
scientific journal Cell. The gene was cloned from a protein in interferon that
allows that substance to inhibit virus and cell growth. While scientists are
still exploring how interferon works, they know that in part it switches on  the
gene that the Cleveland researchers discovered, the announcement said. R.
Silverman, who led the research, said the discovery "will allow researchers  to
explore the precise way in which interferon leads to protection against  viral
infections and cancer. Eventually this could lead to enhanced protection
against viruses and cancer through gene therapy."

Spy plane gets new mission

A high-speed spy plane once used to keep an eye on America's adversaries in  the
Cold War has taken off on a new career - star gazing. An SR-71 Blackbird
reconnaissance aircraft lifted off from California's Edwards

THE SR-71 BLACKBIRD

Air Force Base last week on its maiden science flight, equipped with an
ultraviolet camera to study stars and comets, NASA officials said. During a 1
1/2-hour mission Tuesday, the plane soared to an altitude of 85,000 feet, near
the upper limits of the Earth's atmosphere, giving scientists a view of space
denied to ground-based astronomers. The plane is one of a half-dozen
decommissioned by the Air Force two years ago and turned over to NASA. The
first science flight by the SR-71, which carried a pilot and co-pilot, went
smoothly and produced images of Mars, the constellation Orion and other stars.

Batteries may get a boost

Arizona State University researchers have developed a rubbery conducting
substance that may make it possible to combine the superior energy storage of
lithium batteries with the convenience of dry cells, a potentially important
step toward mass-producing practical electric cars. Chemistry professor  Charles
Austen Angell and his colleagues say in Thursday's issue of the  journal Nature
that they tried adding a little plastic to a vat of molten  lithium or aluminum
salts. The resulting rubbery electrolyte stores energy  well and releases it
quickly, they report. Private and government scientists  are studying these
so-called lithium-polymer cells because of their potential  to hold more energy
in less space than conventional lead-acid batteries.  Better batteries can make
electric cars weigh less, accelerate faster and go  longer between recharges.

   There are no longer versions of these stories available this week.

GRAPHIC: COLOR DRAWING, EARL TOWERY; BLACK AND WHITE PHOTO, Times files; a bird
with military stripes; The SR-71 Blackbird

LOAD-DATE: March 23, 1993


                             1230 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                         Copyright 1993 Star Tribune
                         Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)

                         March 16, 1993, Metro Edition

SECTION: News; THE FOOD REVOLUTION; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 1781 words

HEADLINE: Germany's shunning of gene-altered food frustrates scientists

BYLINE: Sharon Schmickle; Staff Writer

DATELINE: Bonn, Germany

BODY:

   Second of two parts


    For consumer activist Christiane Toussaint, the message came on a post card
depicting a diabolical wizard pulling a tomato and a fish from a steaming vat.
"What risks are alchemists bringing into human foods through genetic
engineering?" asks the inscription on the card, one of thousands mailed this
winter throughout Germany in a campaign against the science that is
revolutionizing agriculture.

    For Heinz Saedler, the message came in the form of raw liver that protesters
hurled at him when he tried to explain why he wanted to experiment with
genetically engineered petunias. "Science has really suffered as a result of
such tactics," said Saedler, a molecular plant geneticist at the Max Planck
Institute for Plant Breeding near Cologne.

    These messages have been effective. Germany, a world leader in science and
technical innovation, has shunned the new biotechnology that is marching toward
agriculture and food processing in much of the rest of the world.

    People here are torn by many of the same arguments over the technology that
divide Minnesotans. And regulatory issues that Minnesotans have debated
intensely for four years are coming to a head here.

    Saedler's test, done in 1990 and 1991, was one of only two outdoor
experiments with genetically engineered plants in Germany, compared with more
than 300 such trials in the United States and more than 160 in France.

    The liver-throwing incident at Saedler's lecture was one of several protests
against the research, which involved giving white-flowering petunias a gene from
red corn to produce salmon-colored blossoms.

    "Lucky enough, they missed me, but the room looked terrible. It was all
bloody," he said.

    Other protesters locked chains onto fences surrounding the institute in an
unsuccessful effort to block researchers from test plots. It was the latest in
more than five years of sometimes violent protest against the technology in
Germany.

    Elsewhere in Europe, reaction to biotechnology has been checkered.

    France has aggressively pursued it. A Dutch company has led the world in
creating food ingredients such as a strain of baker's yeast with genes spliced
together to make bread rise faster. And Belgium has been a leader in engineering
the potatoes, lettuce, beets and other vegetables of tomorrow.

    But strident opposition persists even in countries that are pioneering in
the technology. In August, vandals caused more than $ 1 million in damage to a
Dutch biotechnology company by destroying test plots of corn that had been given
genetic tolerance to herbicides.

    And some countries have followed Germany's cautious approach.

    Since 1990, German scientists have needed government permission to modify
plants and animals genetically or to build laboratories for such experiments.
Even inside their laboratories, they need government permission to perform
genetic procedures that are considered routine in other countries.

    The regulations are more restrictive than in the United States and even in
Minnesota, considered the strictest state in the nation.

    In Germany, permission for outdoor trials with plants can be granted only
after public hearings and an exhaustive investigation of safety issues. Two
outdoor trials have been proposed for this year.

    Like their Minnesota counterparts, scientists in Germany are lobbying the
government to relax restrictions. They claim that Germany is losing genetic
scientists to the United States and other countries, and they see erosion of the
high status that scientists have held in German society.

    "What we are deeply afraid of is that the government will lose its insight
that one of the most prominent components of the Western culture is science,"
Saedler said.

   Germans watch the U.S.

    The scientists join other Germans in watching nervously as companies in the
United States get ready to offer consumers the first gene-altered whole foods.
Tomatoes with genes manipulated to inhibit rotting are expected to be offered
for sale this summer starting in the Midwest.

    If consumers accept the tomatoes, that will give a green light to companies
developing dozens of food and agricultural applications of the technology.
Research into the technology is a $ 500-million-a-year industry worldwide, and
sales of new products are projected in the billions later this decade.

    Like Minnesotans, Germans worry that they will be left behind while creators
of the new products thrive elsewhere. They wonder: Is it unfounded emotional
panic to rein in the technology with regulations, or is it justified by the
unknowns that lie beyond the genetic barriers that scientists are shattering?

    The questions haunt Toussaint, who coordinates food safety issues for AgV, a
national network of 35 consumer groups. Three years ago, environmental concerns
were the centerpiece of the arguments against introducing the products of gene
splicing on farms. Worries that plants given exotic genes would contaminate the
environment persist. But now, food safety is the key issue, Toussaint said.

    "Development of the products such as the genetically modified tomato in the
United States has created a sense of urgency in Europe," said Toussaint.

    There are fears that foods from plants and animals that have been
fundamentally changed will cause allergic reactions and other problems in people
who eat them.

    The opposition isn't fully rooted in fear of biotechnology. Germans have
accepted bioengineered medicines such as insulin for treating diabetes.

    Throughout Europe, the genetic engineering of food and farm animals evokes
greater opposition than any other application of biotechnology, according to a
Eurobarometer Survey conducted last year for the European Commission. Three in
four Europeans favored human gene therapy. But on a scale of one (unacceptable)
to 38 (acceptable), they gave genetically engineered food a 6.3.

    Germans were most likely to reject that use of the technology, the survey
found. There is a basic German squeamishness about tinkering with food, said
Joachim Bollman, a German agriculture official.

    "In Germany, food you bring to the market must be without risk to human
health," he said. "Food is much more an emotional issue than other things . . .
You do not judge from a science basis whether you like tomatoes or pears. You
decide it on an emotional basis. Food issues are very interwoven with the
cultural context."

   Activists insist on labeling

    Some activists in Germany insist that genetic engineering and its products
be banned. The consumer groups that Toussaint coordinates are demanding that
bioengineered foods and ingredients be subjected to comprehensive evaluations
that include ethical, economic and safety considerations. Those that pass the
scrutiny and are offered for sale must be labeled, they insist, so that
consumers have a clear choice about accepting them.

    But safety isn't the only reason to demand labels, Toussaint said. "Perhaps
you can't define reasons why consumers don't want it," she said. "It might be
safe, but consumers can have a broad range of criteria, perhaps religious,
perhaps ethical. You can't limit it to safety."

    The developer of the gene-altered tomato to be sold in the United States
this year, Calgene Inc., of California, has pledged to label the vegetable so
consumers will know how it was produced, but there are no official requirements
that such foods be labeled.

    One argument against labeling comes from Francesco Salamini, the director of
plant breeding at the prestigious Max Planck Institute. Calls for labeling
ignore the genetic histories of plants, he said. To be sure, scientists must use
their biotechnology tools cautiously, he said. But it is misguided to single out
foods because their genes have been changed.

    Nature, farmers and scientists have been adding and subtracting genes in
plants for millions of years, he said.

    "Potatoes are a mosaic of wild species that plant breeders have combined
over the years to bring in genes for resistance of nematode, late blight
[disease] and other problems," Salamini said. "No one has lobbied to ban them.
No one is insisting that a bag of potatoes have a label saying the genes from
this potato are coming from at least 15 species of plants."

    If consumers want labels, they should ask for signals of risks that are
greater than those posed by gene splicing, he said.

    "Why don't you list on the food 'To grow this tomato, I used these 25
chemicals, some of which are carcinogenic'?" he asked.

    Salamini and other scientists blame leftist political ideology for the
opposition. Some factions of the German Green Party, a major political force,
are invoking environmental and consumer issues to oppose corporate involvement
in farming and food production, Salamini said.

    But Toussaint, who works with the Green movement, sees it differently.
Whatever their political motivations, consumers will not yield on the issues
even if some of their fears prove unfounded, she said. "It's the right of the
consumer to have this fear. It's his money, and he is carrying the final
danger," she said. "You must give the consumers freedom of choice. That is our
demand."

   EC considers policy

    How far German consumers can carry their demands is complicated by Germany's
involvement in the European Community (EC). EC officials are considering a
communitywide policy on genetically engineered food and food ingredients.

    Europe also is struggling with issues of patenting animal or plant varieties
created with the technology, something that is considered essential by companies
investing money to develop the technology.

    Europe's regulations are considered crucial for the United States because of
the potential for differences over biotechnology to disrupt farm and food trade.
Europe already has rejected beef from the United States, claiming that hormones
U.S. farmers give to animals are unacceptable.

    If European opponents of agricultural biotechnology prevail while the
technology is adopted elsewhere, there would be new excuses for Europe to resist
farm trade.

    Salamini, a world-renowned plant scientist, is convinced that the opposition
in Germany and elsewhere cannot stop the new scientific revolution in
agriculture and foods. Biotechnology already has made too many inroads, he said.

    "If the science will not go on in Germany, then it will go on in another
European country or in Japan or somewhere else," he said. "The science will not
be stopped."


GRAPHIC: Photograph

LOAD-DATE: March 17, 1993


                             1231 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1993 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                     MARCH 15, 1993, MONDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A13

LENGTH: 974 words

HEADLINE: Reforms Will Hit Palo Alto Doctors
 Tension rising in medical mecca between specialists, generali

BYLINE: Michael McCabe, Chronicle Peninsula Bureau

BODY:

    Some cities are known for their garlic, their butterflies, their cemeteries.

   Palo Alto is known as the city of doctors, at least to many of its 56,000
residents and to patients who come from around the world. Nearly 900 physicians
live or work within the city limits, and more than 500 more are nearby at
Stanford University.

   They represent one of the highest concentrations of people with medical
degrees, particularly specialists, anywhere in the United States, according to
the American Medical Association. Many residents of Palo Alto say it is a rare
block that cannot boast of having at least one doctor living on it.

   As a medical magnet, Palo Alto and Stanford are often likened to the Mayo
Clinic in Rochester, Minn. By their vast numbers, the Palo Alto doctors have
created a huge demand for medical support staff, such as nurses and technicians,
and for millions of dollars worth of equipment.

   When President Clinton's plan for health care reform unfolds, Palo Alto is
likely to notice changes in the mix of doctors earlier than the rest of the
country. Beneath the surface, the medical community on the Peninsula is
undergoing tense changes as the demand for primary-care doctors -- an umbrella
term for general practitioners, including internists, pediatricians and
sometimes obstetrician-gynecologists -- intensifies in the wake of a health care
system whose costs are spiraling out of control.

   Many blame high medical costs on the specialists and say there are too many
of them.

   Like few other communities around the country, Palo Alto enjoys an
embarrassment of riches in doctors who specialize in fields ranging from gene
therapy to sports medicine. Nobody knows just how many of Palo Alto's doctors
are specialists, but estimates range from 70 percent to 75 percent, primarily
because the city is at the center of some of the world's most advanced medical
research.

   Palo Alto has become an extreme example of a trend toward specialization.
During the past decade, the number of doctors in general practice grew by only
21 percent in California and by 17 percent nationally, leaving the greatest
growth in the medical specialities: 46 percent for California and 50 percent for
the nation.

   And that has created tension in Palo Alto between primary-care doctors and
specialists. One reason: Specialists make more money.

   ''The pay gap issue is so absolutely absurd that it is a weak link in
medicine,'' said Dr. Jeffrey Croke, a primary-care doctor at the Stanford
Medical Group and a professor of medicine at Stanford. ''I think it is a
destructive thing. Everyone has the image that all doctors make tons of money.
Most primary-care doctors around here are making about as much as a midlevel
manager in Silicon Valley, perhaps $ 80 to $ 90 grand a year. Specialists can
make three to four times that.''

   But although specialists make more money and enjoy more prestige, they resent
the increasing power that primary-care doctors are assuming in their role as
gatekeepers. In a managed-care health system, primary-care doctors decide which
patients should see a specialist.

   ''There is tension between the two groups in Palo Alto as there is across the
country, and there will be more as the primary doctors assume these gatekeeper
functions,'' said Dr. Philip Lee, director of the Institute for Health Policy
Studies at the University of California at San Francisco and the Clinton
administration's nominee for assistant secretary for health -- the No. 2 health
care job in the federal government.''This is one of the key issues, the
oversupply in many speciality fields. And I think we are going to see some
changes on the national level before the summer is here.''

   COST FACTORS

   Specialists are more expensive in part because they must buy costly equipment
and hire extra staff members. That, coupled with a fear of malpractice suits,
encourages them to order more tests and pursue more aggressive therapy.

   The situation in Palo Alto is complicated further, many believe, by the
abundance of specialists who find themselves competing for too few patients --
patients who ought to be seeing a primary- care doctor first. Sometimes
specialists, seeking work, assume the duties of primary-care doctors but charge
specialist prices, several primary-care doctors said.

   If health care reform is to succeed in making medicine universally available
and affordable, the consensus among health care experts is that this tension
must be eased and that some changes in the mix of doctors is inevitable.

   At the Palo Alto Medical Clinic, which with Stanford University dominates the
medical scene in the area, the movement toward primary-care doctors is already
under way, said Dr. Robert Jamplis, president and chief executive officer of the
Palo Alto Medical Foundation.

   ''Last year, about 60 percent of the 150 doctors here at the clinic were
specialists and the rest were primary-care doctors,'' Jamplis said. ''We will
reverse that trend over the next five years.

   ''The way health care is driven financially is that the specialists are the
ones who are paid the big bucks. It is a chaotic mess right now because we are
halfway through the revolution.''

   TROUBLE IN PARADISE

   Meanwhile, not all doctors find the city of doctors a land of milk and honey.
Many say they know of friends or colleagues who have moved away because they
cannot find enough business. They have gone to places like Texas and North
Carolina, where they are needed.

   ''Palo Alto medicine is like a private club that is hard to break into,''
said one Palo Alto doctor who asked to remain anonymous.  ''Unless you are
connected to Stanford or the (Palo Alto Medical) clinic, you cannot break in.''

   She added: ''But I stay in Palo Alto because my kids love it. I work in
Fremont because it is the only place I can afford the office rent.''



                             1232 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                         Copyright 1993 Star Tribune
                         Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)

                         March 15, 1993, Metro Edition

SECTION: News; THE FOOD REVOLUTION; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 2351 words

HEADLINE: Genetically altered tomatoes vanguard of uncertain new era

BYLINE: Sharon Schmickle; Staff Writer

BODY:

   First of two parts

    This is the year that the long-standing debate over fiddling with genes in
food is to go to the ultimate arbiters, consumers.

    The first crop of genetically engineered foods, tomatoes with their genes
manipulated to inhibit rotting, is to be planted this spring for mass sales to
consumers, starting in the Midwest.

    There will be no secrets, says Calgene Inc., the tomato's creator. The
California-based company says its tomatoes are extra tasty because they can
spend more days ripening on the vine. It has pledged to label the tomatoes so
consumers know that they are buying a genetically engineered vegetable.

    In essence, it will be a referendum on the multibillion-dollar question that
is crucial to companies bidding to bring new genes to food and farming: Will
consumers accept the products of biotechnology?

    In Minnesota, it also poses a test of controversial rules adopted last May
that made this the nation's strictest state in regulating releases of
gene-altered plants, animals and other organisms. The rules require
environmental studies and a permit to release genetically engineered products
outside laboratories.

    Now, as yesterday's science fiction becomes this year's crop, there are new
worries that Minnesota's regulations will scare away business and make criminals
of consumers.

    Calgene's tomato and other products of the nascent technology are coming to
market faster than state regulators had envisioned, forcing a host of difficult
questions.

    Can the tomato be sold under Minnesota's rules?

    Calgene has approval under federal rules to grow and transport the tomato as
a crop. It expects final authorization in June from the Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) to sell it commercially. After that, it would be free to
peddle its tomato in most other states, which leave regulation to the federal
government.

    Critics of Minnesota's policy predicted last year that grocery stores would
need permits to sell the tomato and other genetically engineered foods that are
in the works. The process of getting a permit involves environmental studies and
can cost up to $ 15,000.

    But stores won't need permits, according to John Hynes of the Environmental
Quality Board (EQB), which administers the rules. Calgene can secure a blanket
permit that will cover all sales of its "Flavr Savr" tomato in Minnesota, Hynes
said.


   Decision to avoid state

   This is where the issue becomes complicated. Calgene doesn't plan to sell the
tomato in Minnesota this year, said Steve Benoit of the company's Calgene Fresh
division in Evanston, Ill. The decision to avoid Minnesota was based on
marketing factors other than state regulations, he said. He did not elaborate.

    If Calgene doesn't get a permit to release the tomatoes here, can
Minnesotans buy them in Wisconsin and bring them home? That's illegal as things
stand now, said Hynes. The rules don't specify what happens to violators, but
sanctions could be imposed by the state Agriculture Department or by courts, he
said.

    A violation could be inadvertent. A Minnesotan could go to Chicago, eat a
Flavr Savr tomato for lunch, return home and eliminate seeds in a stool, which
would be defined as a release under the state rules.

    For critics, the issue illustrates the unreasonableness of an approach that
tries to make Minnesota a regulatory island in a flood of technology that is
rolling toward farming and food production.

    "This stuff is coming, and it's not going to care about Minnesota's
borders," said Jeffrey Tate of the University of Minnesota's Biological Process
Technology Institute.

    Restaurants in Wisconsin are "going to get Flavr Savr tomatoes because they
will taste better than any other tomato you can get around here in February,"
Tate said. "Someone is going to drive back to Minnesota, throw half of a
[sandwich] out the window, and you could have genetically engineered tomatoes
growing in the ditch. So what?" The seeds are viable, capable of growing future
generations of tomatoes with the new genetic arrangement.

    Tate and other critics say the rules do not offer Minnesotans protection
they aren't already getting from federal oversight of the technology. Instead,
they said, the rules create confusion and expense for the state and for
companies developing the technology.

    Not so, say supporters who worked for four years to establish the rules.
They insist that there are serious gaps in federal regulation of the technology
and that Minnesota is taking the lead in filling them.

    If anything, the state rules should help Calgene and other biotechnology
companies do business in Minnesota because they will reassure the public that
precautions have been taken, said Rep. Phyllis Kahn, DFL-Minneapolis.

    "What's hurting the market for their products is the perception they might
not be safe," she said. "Regulation helps that rather than hurts it."

    Questions about sales of Calgene's tomato and other bioengineered products
can be resolved by refinements to the existing rules, she said. A task force
appointed by the EQB has met since October to consider the questions. It is
expected to issue recommendations by June.


   Questions about medicines

   Also before the task force are questions about bioengineered medicines
routinely being prescribed for people and animals. Giving someone such
concoctions is releasing a genetically engineered organism into the environment,
under the state's definition of a release. But the EQB has exempted those kinds
of releases from the rules while it tries to decide how to handle them.

    Another unresolved issue before the task force is human gene therapy. The
science of manipulating genes to treat human disorders is advancing rapidly.
People who receive such treatment are genetically engineered organisms under
Minnesota's definition of the term, Hynes said. Do they need permits to step
outside hospitals and laboratories?

    The Legislature may cancel the need for answers to some of the unresolved
questions. Last week, Rep. Jim Tunheim, DFL-Kennedy, introduced a bill that
would roll back state regulation of releases that are subject to federal
oversight. A similar bill is in the works in the Senate, he said.

    The bill is backed by the trade group, the Minnesota Biotechnology
Association, said Jim Woodman, the association's executive director. Association
members such as the Pillsbury Co. of Minneapolis helped draft the bill, he said.

    In 1990, when the Legislature ordered the EQB to set up the rules, outdoor
experiments with gene-altered crops had just begun in the state. And experiments
were underway at the University of Minnesota with fish given genes that made
them grow bigger faster.

    Concerns over the safety of the experiments prompted the rules. Now, after
more than 15 outdoor experiments have been conducted in Minnesota with no
apparent mishap, those concerns are being overshadowed by worries about scaring
away the burgeoning biotechnology industry.

    Research and development of the technology constitutes a huge industry in
itself, with companies and governments spending $ 500 million a year on the
effort, said Ramon Garcia, president of the technology consulting firm InterLink
Associates Inc.

    Last year, companies won approval to conduct 12 outdoor experiments with
gene-altered crops in Minnesota under temporary rules that were in place then.
This year, the first under the new rules, only three applications have been
submitted for the coming growing season. No companies have complained that the
rules are too onerous, and no one has surveyed companies that are staying away,
Hynes said.


   'Dollars and cents issue'

   Tunheim is nervous that there is a perception that Minnesota overregulates
biotechnology.

    Seed potatoes are a big industry in Tunheim's northwestern Minnesota
district. Many farmers grow the potatoes under contract for large farm-supply
companies that are gearing up to offer farmers varieties with genetically
engineered resistance to diseases. The companies are expanding in North Dakota
but not in Minnesota, he said.

    "It gets to be a dollars and cents issue," he said.

    Tunheim said the state rules overlap with federal regulations, something
Kahn disputes. She said she will urge the Legislature to delay action on
Tunheim's bill until the EQB task force completes its work.

    "I'm concerned about substituting the federal permitting system for our
rules," she said. "We don't even know what the federal process will be."

    The federal government claims to broadly regulate genetically engineered
foods, crops and drugs through a network of agencies. Last May, the Food and
Drug Administration relaxed oversight of foods created through genetic
engineering, saying that the technology raises no new or unique safety issues
and that the foods should be regulated the same as foods created by traditional
means. Since then, the U.S. Department of Agriculture also has proposed easing
regulations of gene-altered plants.

    In support of the move, regulators point to experience with outdoor trials
of the products of the research. There have been more than 300 such trials in
the United States since the mid-1980s with no apparent problems.

    The director of the FDA's Office of Biotechnology, Dr. Henry Miller, sharply
criticized Minnesota's approach in January.

    "It has very little scientific credibility," he said. "There is no evidence
that the Minnesota rules are protecting Minnesota from anything except the
availability of many improved products and new research."


   Boycott being organized

   Miller and many other scientists maintain that genetic engineering is not
fundamentally different from other techniques, such as cross-breeding of plants,
that researchers long have used to manipulate genes. For that reason, the
process doesn't warrant the special scrutiny Minnesota has set up, he said.

    Anne Kapucinski, a professor of fisheries and wildlife at the University of
Minnesota, disagrees. One of the scientists who conducted transgenic fish
experiments at the university, she has long called for stricter controls over
releasing the products of such research. And she was a driving force behind the
creation of Minnesota's rules.

    The rules "are scientifically sound and I can defend every one of them," she
said.

    Scientists who downplay the potential danger of the technology are viewing
it too narrowly, she said. They are breaking species barriers in ways they
haven't before and they can't fully predict how the genes they are mixing will
interact with other genes, she said.

    "It's like adding several new ingredients to a soup," she said. "Because you
aren't sure how their flavors will interact, you don't know what it will taste
like."

    Activists who agree that the technology is a radical departure from the food
science of the past are organizing a national boycott against Calgene's tomato.
Ted Howard, executive director of the Pure Food Campaign, based in Washington,
D.C., said the organization expects to spend $ 1 million this year in a drive to
block genetically engineered foods from reaching consumers.

    In January, the campaigners confronted the Campbell Soup Co., which owns
rights to use the Flavr Savr tomato in processing. Jeremy Rifkin, a
biotechnology opponent and a leader of the campaign, declared it a victory for
his group when Campbell said it had no plans to stir bioengineered tomatoes into
its products. But a Campbell spokesman said the company was following a
long-standing plan, not backing away from the Calgene tomato because of boycott
threats or concerns about the tomato's wholesomeness.

    As part of the federal review of the tomato, Calgene submitted studies and
opinions from dozens of scientists who stated that the Flavr Savr tomato is as
safe and nutritious as conventional tomatoes. And Calgene voluntarily submitted
its safety data for review by a panel of food scientists, who also concluded
that the tomato is safe.

    But Pure Food says the new tomato poses a danger of allergic reactions and
other problems. The group's objections go beyond food safety issues.

    "This technology raises some very big ethical, philosophical questions that
should be debated more publicly," Howard said. "It is going to lead away from
the farmer-, soil-based system that has served us well to an increasing kind of
synthetic production."




   Ripe, for a change


   Tomatoes at the supermarket usually have been picked early to avoid damage
during shipping. The result: a tough, tasteless fruit. But genetic engineers
have retooled the tomato to inhibit rotting, allowing farmers to leave it on the
vine to ripen for the few days it needs to develop more flavor.



   AGING PROCESS OF A TOMATO


   A natural self-destruct mechanism causes the tomato to break up and deposit
its seeds onto the ground, thus regenerating itself.

    A) GREEN TOMATO

   Pectin and other carbohydrates act as a cement that keeps the cell walls firm
while the tomato develops.

    B) RIPE TOMATO

   The tomato releases an enzyme called polygalacturonase that breaks the pectin
into globs, causing the cells to separate.



   A LONGER LIFE THROUGH SCIENCE


   Scientists at Calgene isolated the gene that triggers the enzyme. Using
technology called antisense genetics, they copied the gene and put it into the
tomato's DNA backwards.


   1. The isolated DNA is copied and put in backwards into the DNA strand.


   2. That sets up conflicting messages - one saying "soften" and another "don't
soften" - that cancel each other.


   3. The altered DNA is planted into a bacterium that acts as a shuttle.


   4. The bacteria transfers the DNA to a tomato plant cell by infecting it.


   5. The tomato cell now contains DNA with conflicting signals.


   6. Cells with the new trait are multiplied.


   7. Plants are grown from the cells.


   SOURCES: Scientific American; Calgene Fresh Inc.

   Star Tribune Graphic/Anders Ramberg



GRAPHIC: Illustration; Chart

LOAD-DATE: March 17, 1993


                             1233 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1993 The Baltimore Sun Company
                             All Rights Reserved
                               The Baltimore Sun

                     March 13, 1993 Saturday FINAL Edition
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 18C

LENGTH: 1048 words

HEADLINE: BIOTECH BUILDINGS CRUNCH Lack of lab space in area constrains
industry, firms say

BYLINE: Liz Bowie

SOURCE: Staff Writer

BODY:

   Maryland's biotech companies have gobbled up the region's affordable
laboratory space to such an extent that industry growth may be constrained.

   When Human Genome Sciences was formed in August of last year, Lewis Shuster,
a veteran Maryland biotech executive and the company's new executive vice
president, searched for a building. He looked in the Washington suburbs and in
Howard and Anne Arundel counties.

   "Basically, there was nothing," he said. Then he got lucky. He heard that
Synthecell Corp., another biotech company, was moving from its Rockville home to
larger quarters. So he quickly made a deal, pushing Synthecell out the door
early.

   The story is often repeated in Maryland as biotechnology companies of all
sizes compete for a limited amount of space. "It is very, very frustrating for
us," Mr. Shuster said. "It is a real constraint on our growth."

   As banks have shied away from lending developers money for construction,
extra space has quickly been taken. Today, the problem extends from Baltimore to
the Interstate 270 corridor in Montgomery County, where most of Maryland's
biotech companies are headquartered. While state and local officials say they
are concerned about the helping the tiny industry find a solution to its space
crunch, no action has yet been taken.

   "They call (Baltimore) the city where science comes to life, but they don't
make half the effort to support biotech that they do to support Coke or Sears,"
Paul M. Silber, chief executive of In Vitro Technologies, complained.

   At least one company that wanted to move to Maryland didn't, and a local
company found itself courted by other states.

   Clonetics Inc., a San Diego company with 40 employees, wanted to move to
Maryland last year. Its chief executive, Suzan Garner, traveled to Baltimore
four times, staying a week each time to look for about 25,000 square feet of
space.

   "After an intensive six-month search with two good Realtors, we were all very
disappointed," she said. "We thought we would see a lot of available space, and
there was just nothing." In San Diego, she said, the kind of space she was
seeking is readily available.

   Genetic Therapy, Inc. of Gaithersburg and Crop Genetics International of
Hanover, two of Maryland's most prominent -- if not profitable -- biotech
companies, have had to use cash that they otherwise could have spent

   on research and development to renovate spaces to fill their growing needs.

   And Genetic Therapy, which is in the process of spending $4 million to add
38,000 square feet of space to its existing 19,000, was wooed by state and
county officials in West Virginia. The officials offered to help the company get
loans through guarantees and other arrangements. Maryland, on the other hand,
offered far less in loan guarantees.

   Genetic Therapy will stay in Maryland to be close to the National Institutes
of Health and other scientific research institutions, but Chief Executive James
Barrett said that when the company begins manufacturing a product he will keep
in mind West Virginia's offer. "They certainly opened our eyes," he said.

   Crop Genetics, which needed manufacturing space this year, was forced to
raise the necessary cash by a secondary public offering last summer at a time
when the market was not particularly favorable.

   Developers say the real estate market is the major reason they are unable to
covert the region's glut of vacant office and warehouse space to house biotech
companies. It can cost $150 a square foot to outfit a vacant building with
laboratories, and banks have been unwilling to lend money for such a project --
particularly when the tenant is a biotech company.

   Take four Baltimore biotechnology companies that are now outgrowing the three
local incubators -- buildings that offer tiny start-up technology companies
cheap space.

   Molecular Tool Inc., Chektec Corp., In Vitro Technologies and Adheron Corp.
all want more space. But these are private companies, with fewer than 30 or 40
employees, that don't have products on the market or a lot of cash.

   They don't want to pay rents higher than $20 a square foot, and they don't
want to commit to long-term leases because of the riskiness of their business:
In 10 years they probably will be either a multi-million dollar company or out
of business. And, to top it off, they want to be in a building that will allow
them to grow.

   "The problem is with the real estate market in general," said Bill Struever,
a real estate developer. "I can't get the bank to lend me $20 a square foot for
good tenants."

   Mr. Struever is a member of a group of developers, engineers and architects
who have begun looking at the needs of biotechnology companies. While their
survey is not complete, it appears that state and city economic development
leaders are beginning to look at ways they can help ease the crunch.

   "If we don't do something fairly quickly it will hurt our whole life sciences
effort," said Sara Trenery, senior vice president for real estate development at
the Baltimore Development Corp.

   The state is considering ways to spread the risk between the company, the
developer and government, said Joel Lee, deputy secretary for the Department of
Economic and Employment Development.

   Besides direct loans, the state could offer to guarantee a portion of a loan
or a lease, which would mean a biotechnology company would not have to put as
much cash into a renovation up front. In addition, Mr. Lee said he is hoping the
federal government will be able to provide money.

   Already, one developer, David W. Baird of Belt's Realty Services Inc. is
studying the feasibility of building laboratory space for small marine
biotechnology companies in two buildings in Fells Point: at Swans Wharf and the
Saga Building, a warehouse on Aliceanna Street.

   "In the marine biotech field we feel there is enough activity building that
we may be willing to take a calculated risk," Mr. Baird said. Once the company's
planning studies are complete, he said, they will find companies interested in
space and then go to the state seeking some backing.

   That request may be the first time the state and city officials will confront
a proposal from a developer. Without government support, Mr. Baird said, the
project will not go ahead.

CORRECTION-DATE: March 13, 1993

CORRECTION:

   The spelling of C. William Struever has been corrected for the archive
database. See microfilm for original story.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, David Manyak is the chief executive officer of NovaScreen, a
drug-discovery division of space-starved Adheron Inc.; KENNETH K. LAM/STAFF
PHOTO

LOAD-DATE: June 19, 2002


                             1234 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1993 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                    March 12, 1993, Friday, ONE STAR EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL, Pg. A8

LENGTH: 502 words

HEADLINE: DEFECTIVE GENE TIED TO CANCER;
IT CAN TRIGGER TWO VARIETIES OF BRAIN TUMORS, STUDY SAYS

BYLINE: DANIEL Q. HANEY, ASSOCIATED PRESS WRITER

BODY:


   Scientists have tracked down a defective gene that may cause nearly a third
of all human brain tumors, opening the way for new strategies to stop these
cancers.

   The genetic error causes neurofibromatosis type 2 -- or NF2 -- a disease that
is passed through families. However, researchers believe that defects in the
same gene also frequently cause brain tumors that occur sporadically rather than
being inherited.

   About 15,600 Americans are diagnosed with brain tumors each year, and 11,500
die from them. Doctors from Massachusetts General Hospital, who discovered the
gene, said yesterday it may be implicated in nearly one-third of these cases.

   ''This is an enormously exciting discovery,'' commented Dr. Nancy Ratner of
the University of Cincinnati. ''We hope that discovering the defect that
underlies NF2 will help us understand enough of the biology to treat this
disease.''

   The defective gene appears to trigger two slow-growing forms of brain tumors
-- acoustic neuromas, which often lead to deafness, and meningiomas, which are
cancer of the membrane surrounding the brain.

   The gene was isolated by a team led by Dr. James F. Gusella. They reported
their findings in the latest issue of the journal Cell.

   Among the implications of the discovery:

   -- It could enable doctors to learn whether members of families where NF2 is
common have inherited the bad gene themselves.

   -- It could give scientists new targets for designing drugs or gene-therapy
techniques to treat the brain tumors. The only current therapy is to remove the
tumors surgically.

   -- It reveals an apparently new way in which a mix up in the body's proteins
can result in cancer.

   The gene is entirely distinct from the one that causes a distantly related
illness, neurofibromatosis type 1. The gene for that disorder, which is
sometimes confused with the Elephant Man's disease, was discovered in 1990.

   The inherited disease is rare, occurring in about one of every 50,000 people.
However, the same tumors are relatively common when they occur without any link
to a family history.

   ''There is good evidence that the same gene is involved in sporadic and
inherited forms of these tumors,'' Gusella said.

   The gene is one of class known as tumor-suppressor genes. Everyone is born
with two copies of the gene, and the brain tumors occur only when both copies of
the gene are damaged.

   In the inherited form the disease, people inherit one bad gene from their
parents. They get cancer if the second gene somehow is harmed. The sporadic
version develops when both copies become defective.

   The NF2 gene makes a protein called merlin -- short for moesin-ezrin-
radixin-like protein. The researchers believe it hooks the cell's outer coat, or
membrane, to the latticework of tiny filaments that form the cell's interior
scaffolding.

   The researchers said that by understanding the biological miscue that leads
to the tumors, it should eventually be possible to design a drug to correct the
mistake. LIB5

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 1995


                             1235 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                       March 12, 1993 Friday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 9A

LENGTH: 393 words

HEADLINE: STUDY TRACKS GENE IN BRAIN TUMORS

BYLINE: ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: BOSTON

BODY:

   Scientists have tracked down a defective gene that may cause nearly a third
of all human brain tumors, opening the way for new strategies to stop these
cancers.

   The genetic error causes neurofibromatosis type 2 - or NF2 - a disease that
is passed through families. However, researchers believe that defects in the
same gene also frequently cause brain tumors that occur sporadically rather than
being inherited.

   About 15,600 Americans are diagnosed with brain tumors each year, and 11,500
die from them. Doctors from Massachusetts General Hospital, who discovered the
gene, said yesterday it may be implicated in nearly one-third of these cases.

   "This is an enormously exciting discovery," said Dr. Nancy Ratner of the
University of Cincinnati. "We hope that discovering the defect that underlies
NF2 will help us understand enough of the biology to treat this disease."

   The defective gene appears to trigger two slow-growing forms of brain tumors
- acoustic neuromas, which often lead to deafness, and meningiomas, which are
cancer of the membrane surrounding the brain.

   The gene was isolated by a team led by Dr. James F. Gusella. They reported
their findings in the latest issue of the journal Cell.

   Among the implications of the discovery:

   It could enable doctors to learn whether members of families where NF2 is
common have inherited the bad gene themselves.

   It could give scientists new targets for designing drugs or gene-therapy
techniques to treat the brain tumors. The only current therapy is to remove the
tumors surgically.

   It reveals an apparently new way in which a mix-up in the body's proteins can
result in cancer.

   The gene is entirely distinct from the one that causes a distantly related
illness, neurofibromatosis type 1. The gene for that disorder, which is
sometimes confused with the Elephant Man's disease, was discovered in 1990.

   The inherited disease is rare, occurring in about one of every 50,000 people.
However, the same tumors are relatively common when they occur without any link
to a family history.

   "There is good evidence that the same gene is involved in sporadic and
inherited forms of these tumors," Gusella said.

   The gene is one of class known as tumor-suppressor genes. Everyone is born
with two copies of the gene, and the brain tumors occur only when both copies of
the gene are damaged.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO BY AP DR. JAMES F. GUSELLA: Led reasearch team that isolated gene
responsible for about a third of all brain tumors.

LOAD-DATE: March 18, 1993


                             1236 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1993 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                          March 12, 1993 Friday, THIRD

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A15

LENGTH: 515 words

HEADLINE: BAD GENE LINKED TO BRAIN TUMORS

BYLINE: By DANIEL Q. HANEY AP science writer

DATELINE: BOSTON

BODY:

   Scientists have tracked down a defective gene that may cause nearly a third
of all human brain tumors, opening the way for new strategies to stop these
cancers.

   The genetic error causes neurofibromatosis type 2 - or NF2 - a disease that
is passed through families. However, researchers believe that defects in the
same gene also frequently cause brain tumors that occur sporadically rather than
being inherited.

   About 15,600 Americans are diagnosed with brain tumors each year, and 11,500
die. Doctors from Massachusetts General Hospital, who discovered the gene, said
Thursday it may be implicated in nearly one-third of these cases.

   "This is an enormously exciting discovery," said Dr. Nancy Ratner of the
University of Cincinnati. "We hope that discovering the defect that underlies
NF2 will help us understand enough of the biology to treat this disease."

   The defective gene appears to trigger two slow-growing forms of brain tumors
- acoustic neuromas, which often lead to deafness, and meningiomas, which is
cancer of the membrane surrounding the brain.

   The gene was isolated by a team led by Dr. James Gusella. They reported their
findings in the latest issue of the journal Cell.

   Among the implications of the discovery:

   It could enable doctors to learn whether members of families where NF2 is
common have also inherited the bad gene.

   It could give scientists new targets for designing drugs or gene-therapy
techniques to treat brain tumors. The only current therapy is to surgically
remove the tumors.

   It reveals an apparently new way in which an error in the body's proteins can
result in cancer.

   The gene is entirely distinct from the one that causes a distantly related
illness, neurofibromatosis type 1. The gene for that disorder, which is
sometimes confused with the Elephant Man's disease, was discovered in 1990.

   The inherited disease is rare, occurring in about one of every 50,000 people.
However, the same tumors are relatively common when they occur without any link
to a family history.

   "There is good evidence that the same gene is involved in sporadic and
inherited forms of these tumors," Gusella said.

   The gene is one of a class known as tumor-suppressor genes. Everyone is born
with two copies of the gene, and brain tumors occur only when both copies of the
gene are damaged.

   In the inherited form, people receive one bad gene from their parents. They
get cancer if the second gene is harmed. The sporadic version develops when both
copies become defective.

   The NF2 gene makes a protein called merlin - short for
moesin-ezrin-radixin-like protein. The researchers believe it hooks the cell's
outer coat, or membrane, to the latticework of tiny filaments that form the
cell's interior scaffolding.

   The researchers said that by understanding the biological miscue that leads
to the tumors, it should be possible to design a drug to correct the mistake.
Gusella said one obvious approach will be simply producing the missing NF2
protein and giving it to people with the cancer.

   No one knows if this method will work.

LOAD-DATE: May 17, 1993


                             1237 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1993 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            March 10, 1993 Wednesday

SECTION: LIFESTYLE; Pg. E-1

LENGTH: 1576 words

HEADLINE: STEM CELLS;
TRANSPLANTING MASTER CELLS IS NEW WEAPON AGAINST CANCER

BYLINE: REX DALTON, Staff Writer

BODY:

   One recent morning in a UCSD Cancer Center laboratory, scientists conducted
an experiment to try to capture gems of life from blood for a new era of
transplantation. Their key tool was a foot-long magnet -- a rather unorthodox
device for prospecting in blood, but one symbolic of the extent of the search.
The elusive quarry the scientists were seeking were stem cells, a master cell
that makes infection-fighting cells of the body's immune system, oxygen-carrying
red cells and other vital components of blood. The experimental transplantation
of stem cells is being studied as an alternative to bone marrow transplants
after chemotherapy for cancer. Stem cell transplantation also is under study for
use in gene therapy to fight malignancies and other diseases.

   This would involve genetically engineering a patient's stem cells,
transplanting them, and having the newly designed stem cells produce specific
cells. With a stem cell transplant, doctors are learning how to isolate the
master cell that originates in bone marrow, infuse it into patients, and produce
better results than the widely used, but risky, bone marrow transplant. Stem
cell transplants, the scientists hope, will prompt a quicker blood- and
immune-system restoration, reduce a patient's risk of infection, and lessen the
chance of cancer recurrence. But to make stem cell transplants a viable
alternative, scientists need an easy method to capture the stem cells from a
patient's circulating blood stream, where they exist in small numbers. Enter the
magnet. In the experiment, a patient's blood containing a low percent of stem
cells was placed in an oversized test tube with special chemicals to make iron
adhere to the stem cells and a dash of microscopic iron beads. Then the magnet
was positioned alongside the test tube held upright in a stand. Gotcha. There on
the side of the test tube near the magnet was a dark residue -- the iron-bonded
stem cells, ready to be separated from their iron anchors, purified, and then
prepared for future transplantation. Within the next few months, UCSD
researchers hope to refine this method, or others, to produce purified and
concentrated stem cell doses that can be transplanted back into the donating
patient. At first, UCSD physicians will attempt the purified stem cell
transplants in certain patients with metastatic breast cancer, patients with
non-small cell lung cancer and patients with ovarian cancer. Eventually, the
purified stem cell transplants might be applicable to a host of other
difficult-to-cure diseases, researchers say. While the process to isolate stem
cells is in the early stages, Dr. Anthony D. Ho, the new head of bone marrow
transplantation at UCSD, is encouraged. "It is very exciting," said Ho.

   "This makes me quite enthusiastic." Better than bone marrow Over the last 20
years, traditional bone marrow transplants have permitted physicians to save
many cancer patients who previously had little chance of survival. With a bone
marrow transplant, a patient has the pulpy marrow withdrawn from the pelvic
bones by a large syringe, which repeatedly is reinserted to suck out the stem
cell-rich marrow.

   This marrow is then treated in a laboratory to kill any malignant cells, and
then frozen. The patient is given various courses of chemotherapy and/or
radiation, depending on the type of cancer.

   While killing cancer cells, these therapies also destroy the body's immune
system -- leaving the patient prone to deadly infections. Once the treatment is
completed, the marrow is transplanted intravenously back into the patient. But
with bone marrow transplants, it might take three or four weeks before the
marrow grafts and begins producing the needed immune system cells. It is during
this time that the patient is at high risk of infection. With the purified stem
cell transplant -- enhanced by special new drugs called growth factors -- this
engraftment time promises to be much shorter. Ho said cases he has done here and
elsewhere indicate that stem cells implant themselves in eight days on average
-- less than a third of the time for a bone marrow transplant engraftment. These
more rapid engraftment times mean the body's immune system is restored, reducing
the chance of infections, doctors say. Physicians at UCSD and at Scripps Clinic
and Research Foundation in La Jolla have transplanted a blood component with a
small quantity of stem cells into a handful of patients over the last three
years. UCSD has used the therapy in patients with Hodgkin's lymphoma,
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, metastatic breast cancer, and ovarian cancer, Ho said.

   With lymphoma patients, the therapy has had similar success as bone marrow
transplants, although the cells graft a lot quicker with the new method.

   For Mary K. Layton, 43, of University City, this type of stem cell transplant
has been a lifesaver. Last summer, Layton was told she had a few months to live,
after her breast cancer returned in the form of two lemon-sized tumors growing
rapidly in her liver. But today, Layton is alive.

   Tests show her liver tumors have disappeared, and she is doing well after two
stem cell transplants. "This has given me a second chance at life," said Layton,
a dental hygienist working in her husband's El Cajon dental practice.

   "Remember there is hope out there for people who are told they are terminal.

   Never give up." For her type of stem cell transplants, Layton was
hospitalized for 19 days in November; and then again for 16 days in January for
the second transplant. During these hospitalizations, her treatment included a
regime involving drugs to boost her body's production of stem cells, collection
of the stem cells, chemotherapy and then transplantation of the stem cell
component. This entire process then was repeated in January. Surprisingly, she
said, the side effects from the therapy were "very minimal." "The worst part was
the boredom; being in isolation," said Layton. Side effects were minimal, Mason
said, because the patient receives a series of lower daily doses of chemotherapy
over a longer period of time, which total a super-high dose of chemotherapy. It
has been costly, however -- about $300,000 in charges so far. Toward a purer
product Now the goal for researchers is to find a method to further purify stem
cells for transplantation.

   Scientists at UCSD and other research centers around the nation are trying
magnets, chemical-bonding methods, and a number of other novel approaches to
capture and purify the life-giving stem cells. UCSD scientists are testing and
comparing several of these methods in laboratory tests, and in the next few
months will use purified stem cells from the most promising of these processes
to perform transplants. Ho said the magnet approach seems to provide a more
purified batch of stem cells while a chemical-separation method produces a less
pure product but appears to minimize the damage to the delicate stem cells. Dr.
James R. Mason, a UCSD cancer specialist, said he will seek approval later this
month from the university's Human Subjects Committee to transplant purified stem
cells captured with the experimental chemical-bonding method into patients with
non-small cell lung cancer. "We will be using this method in transplanting
patients in the next few months," said Mason, noting that the magnet stem cell
separation approach will follow soon after. A metastatic breast cancer patient
whose tumor responds to chemotherapy is seen as a good candidate for stem cell
transplantation, he said. Other metastatic breast cancer patients considered for
the procedure at UCSD or Scripps Clinic are women who have the disease in 10
lymph nodes, and those with inflamed tumors, doctors say. Because metastatic
breast cancer patients have done so poorly after single bone marrow transplants,
UCSD physicians have started a new study in which such patients receive two stem
cell transplants after chemotherapy courses. Layton was UCSD's first breast
cancer patient to undergo the tandem stem cell transplant, said Mason. Scripps
Clinic physicians also have used this approach in two cancer cases -- in a
myeloma patient, and a woman with a rare type of ovarian cancer. Both patients
apparently have had no disease recurrence so far, said Dr. R. Robert McMillan,
head of Scripps Clinic's bone marrow transplant program. But he said that no
long-term conclusions can be reached about the therapy yet. To collect the stem
cells, doctors use a process called pheresis, a less risky procedure than bone
punctures used for marrow collection.

   Pheresis is widely used for collecting blood components, such as platelets
for clotting. Doctors insert a catheter into a vessel at the base of a patient's
neck. The catheter allows a patient to be hooked up to a machine to siphon off
and return blood after pheresis. During pheresis, the blood siphoned from the
patient is spun in a centrifuge, which separates components by weight.

   Doctors know stem cells are in a component called mononuclear cells, which
are separated through the pheresis. This mononuclear cell component -- which
contains 1 percent to 2 percent stem cells -- is what is now transplanted into
patients.

   And this component is being mined to produce the stem cell doses of 90
percent purity. Excitement about the stem cell transplants is such that UCSD
physicians say they are expanding their capacity to perform pheresis --
expecting an increasing number of patients to be undergoing the stem cell
transplants.

GRAPHIC: 4 PICS; 3 DIAGRAMS; CAPTIONS: 1. Stem cell transplantation 2. At UCSD:
Dr. Anthony D. Ho describes the process of isolating and preparing stem cells,
then transplanting them into cancer patients after chemotherapy. 3. Purifying
process: Stem cells, shown here greatly magnified, are mixed with iron beads so
they can be captured by magnets. 4. Traditional bone marrow transplantation 5.
Lab technician Midori Maruyama is helping develop a new process to purify stem
cells. (E-6) 6. Cancer patient Mary Kay Layton, of University City, recently
underwent two stem-cell transplants which may have prolonged her life. (E-6) 7.
The ultimate cell (E-6); PHOTOBY: 1,4,7. Graphics / NEIL PINCHIN DESIGN 2,5,6.
Union-Tribune / MICHAEL FRANKLIN 3. Photo / BAXTER BIOTECH GROUP

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                             1238 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                  March 9, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 18; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 68 words

HEADLINE: Oil Aims at Symptoms

BODY:

   To the Editor:

   "No One Said Lorenzo's Oil Could Prevent Nerve Disease," your headline on my
March 2 letter, is misleading. In a metabolic disorder like
adrenoleukodystrophy, it is the symptoms that everyone is trying to prevent,
pending eventual cloning of the gene and availability of genetic therapy that
will fix the genetic defect and be a cure.

MICHAELA ODONE
Fairfax, Va., March 4, 1993

LOAD-DATE: March 9, 1993


                             1239 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1993 The Buffalo News
                            Buffalo News (New York)



                      March 7, 1993, Sunday, Final Edition

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 787 words

HEADLINE: NEW MEDICAL ERA IS OPENING WITH MARYLAND CASE

BYLINE: By LIZ BOWIE, Baltimore Sun

BODY:

    Within weeks, two Maryland doctors will provide a peek at 21st century
medicine. A girl whose short life has been consumed by the struggle against a
fatal illness will get an infusion of genetically altered cells -- in a
treatment so painless that she'll probably be watching one of her favorite
videos, "The Little Mermaid," during the procedure.

   If the treatment works, the girl will be cured within months. The idea is
radically simple: Halt illness at its core, the genetic code that tells the body
how to function. Turning that idea into reality has become the life's work of
two doctors at the girl's bedside, R. Michael Blaese and Kenneth W.  Culver.

   Success in this, one of the world's first gene therapy experiments, would
help usher in a new medicine with the potential to cure some of the world's
worst scourges -- cancer, AIDS, cystic fibrosis, muscular dystrophy and
hemophilia.

   As a beginning, the National Institutes of Health doctors are trying to cure
a little-known hereditary disorder called adenosine deaminase, or ADA,
deficiency, which has threatened the girl's life since she was born.

   Like David, the famous "bubble boy" forced to live in a sterile world in the
1970s, the 6-year-old girl -- and an 11-year-old who will be treated soon
afterward -- have no ADA gene, and therefore, barely functioning immune systems.
Until her first gene therapy treatments in 1990, the younger girl rarely left
her house except to go to the doctor.
 A sense of the beautiful

   Washington Post
 Why did the peacock develop its extravagant tail? Because, according to Swedish
scientists, peahens think they're beautiful.

   That conclusion, based on a computer simulation of a brain trying to
recognize an image, confirms a view that Charles Darwin put forth as part of his
second theory of evolution. The first theory, published in 1859, was natural
selection -- the idea that individuals of a species are born with slight
differences and that competition among them favors survival of those whose
differences confer benefit. Darwin's second theory, published in 1871, was
sexual selection -- the idea that females (rarely males) choose mates that
display most strongly traits that females find attractive.

   Magnus Enquist and Anthony Arak of the University of Stockholm report in the
journal Nature that they programmed a computer to recognize a particular
geometric shape. They found that as the computer learned, it also acquired
biases toward certain exaggerations in one part or another of the shape.

   Enquist and Arak suggest that the computer had acquired the digital
equivalent of an aesthetic sense and propose that brains may have evolved in the
same way.
 Planting rice to save rain forest

   Washington Post
 WASHINGTON -- Agricultural researchers in Colombia have developed a rice
variety that they say could help discourage South American farmers from clearing
more Amazon rain forest to create pasture for cattle.

   The rice is the first variety that grows well in the poor, unirrigated, acid
soils of the grassy savannas that surround the rain forest, land that is now
used mainly as pasture.

   The idea behind the new rice variety is that it can be planted along with
grasses and legumes for foraging. Four months later, the rice is harvested and
the field opened to grazing. After subtracting the cost of fertilizer and other
inputs for the rice, the harvest still makes a profit.

   At the same time, the residual fertilizer makes the pasture so much richer
that it can support six times more cattle per acre.

   The rice and the new farming system were developed at the International
Center for Tropical Agriculture, in Cali.

LOAD-DATE: March 16, 1993


                             1240 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1993 The Journal of Commerce, Inc.
                              Journal of Commerce

                             March 5, 1993, Friday

SECTION: CHEM, Pg. 5A

LENGTH: 324 words

HEADLINE: COMMODITY / CHEMICAL BRIEFS

BYLINE: From Wire and Staff Reports

BODY:


   GENENTECH COLLABORATES

   WITH NEW BIOTECH FIRM

   SOUTH SAN FRANCISCO, Calif. - Genentech Inc. said Wednesday it will work with
GenVec, a newly formed biotechnology company, to develop gene therapy for cystic
fibrosis and other serious diseases.

   Genentech, which has a 20 percent equity stake in GenVec, will retain
worldwide marketing rights to any gene therapy product developed for cystic
fibrosis.

   In December, the National Institutes of Health gave GenVec the approval to
begin human gene therapy trials on a first-generation cystic fibrosis drug. The
company will also focus on getting a second-generation cystic fibrosis product
into human clinical trials.  CHILEAN COPPER SALES

   EXPECTED TO DECLINE SANTIAGO, Chile - Chile's state mining company
Codelco-Chile will sell 1.109 million metric tons of copper this year, down 6.8
percent from a year ago, a company official said Wednesday.

   In an interview published in the Estrategia newspaper, Codelco sales manager
Owen Guerrini said income from copper sales this year would reach $ 2.4 billion.
He offered no comparison for 1992.

   Sales in 1992 totaled 1.190 million tons, 90,000 above that year's target.
Part of this increase was the result of sales of 45,000 to 50,000 tons of
stocks, while the rest came from greater output at the Chuquicamata mine, he
said.  SIX MORE SITES NAMED

   FOR AIDS THERAPY TEST

   BETHESDA, Md. - Six more research sites were tentatively named to conduct
human trials into a novel AIDS therapy, a statement from the National Institutes
of Health said.

   The new therapy uses a combination of three drugs that in the laboratory has
shown the capacity to stop the spread of the virus.

   The new sites are Indiana University (Indianapolis); Mount Sinai Hospital
(New York); the University of California at San Diego; the University of
Cincinnati; the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill; the University of
Pennsylvania (Philadelphia).

EDITOR-NOTE:
COMMODITY / CHEMICAL BRIEFS

LOAD-DATE: December 12, 1996


                             1241 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1993 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe



                     March 4, 1993, Thursday, City Edition

SECTION: LIVING; Pg. 55

LENGTH: 2440 words

HEADLINE: Bringing new life to Mass General;
By building a team that listens to patients, Dr. Isaac Schiff has put the
hospital back in the baby business;
Profiles in Excellence First in a series of occasional articles.

BYLINE: By M.R. Montgomery, Globe Staff

BODY:

    The truth of the matter was this: The Massachusetts General Hospital wasn't
general.  The largest research and teaching medical center in the United States
didn't do babies.

   It has done neonatology for years - with a 16-bed intensive care unit for the
critically ill and very premature babies that are flown in and ambulanced in
from all over New England. It did and does great work with women's cancers (the
familiar Pap test was brought into clinical perfection there).  But it didn't
help couples make babies, it did nothing about the critical nine months of
gestation, and it hadn't delivered a baby since right after World War II when
all the surgeons came home from the services armed with new techniques and the
antibiotics that made elective and difficult surgeries less of a risk.  The
ex-military surgeons captured all the beds in the wards.

   It was the Massachusetts Incomplete Hospital.

   Enter Dr. Isaac Schiff. In 1988, when he was just 44 years old, the General
hired him away from Brigham and Women's, where he was chief of the Reproductive
Endocrinology Service, to bring MGH into the modern world of gynecology.  Since
then, slowly, carefully, on schedule, as chief of the Vincent Memorial
Gynecology Service within MGH, he has revolutionized treatment. He has made it a
General Hospital again.

   Leadership, it should be said, is in the details.  When Schiff arrived, there
were two waiting rooms at the Vincent gynecology service in the Wang Ambulatory
Care Center. There was one door and one waiting room for the clinic patients
seen by residents and interns; there was another door and another waiting room
for the well insured and the wealthy who would be seen as private patients by
the teaching staff.  The first thing he did, even before hiring new doctors, was
to take down the wall.  There are still two doors, but only one room, one
service, one hospital.

   And since the wall came down, the gynecology service, which one new staff
member describes as "having been a shambles," has grown in size and scope.  When
Schiff arrived, there were three cancer specialists and one "benign"
gynecologist.  Schiff has added three reproductive endocrinologists (four
counting himself), three benign gynecologists and one urological gynecologist.
That doubles the department, and he had to shepherd every one through
appointments to the Harvard Medical School faculty. ("That alone took a great
deal of my time," he recalled in typical understatement.) And he continues to
supervise their work, that is, their practice and their teaching.  That takes
more of his time.

   And he isn't done yet.  Just a few months ago, the Vincent started a small
program in in-vitro fertilization - IVF.  It is small in patient numbers still,
with just two pregnancies created, but has a staff of three embryological
specialists, all MDs, and the necessary office space, support staff, nurses and
a brand-new operating room and embryology laboratory.

   Leadership, in the end, requires the respect of those you choose to associate
with.  One example: the largest for-profit IVF corporation in the United States,
IVF America, with several centers including one at Waltham-Weston Hospital, has
donated $ 1.5 million to the Vincent for basic research on a number of problems
associated with fertility assistance.  There are large and successful research
programs to pick from at Yale, Penn and UCLA, and at Beth Israel and Brigham's
and New England Medical Center here in Boston, just to name a few. The money,
for a research fellowship and laboratory support, was awarded to the Vincent
Memorial last month, and the decision was made before the Vincent had documented
its first pregnancy.

   "We spoke to many programs," explained Don Wood, IVF America vice president
for science; "we spoke to programs in many countries.  Well, we found the
visionary we wanted, the one who wants to lead, and the visionary is Dr. Isaac
Schiff."

   In just about two years from now, the Vincent will once again deliver babies.
Not many, perhaps 2,000 a year, an obstetrical service just a fifth the size of
the city's largest - at Brigham and Women's.  That plan drew early criticism,
now mollified by the passage of time and the Vincent's commitment to training
professional midwives for in-hospital deliveries.

   "They will be largely our own gynecology clients," Schiff said, "who
understandably do not wish to be sent somewhere else for prenatal care and
delivery; and we will serve women who are already patients of the hospital, many
with some other condition which makes childbirth a risk and who want to be in
the care of their own specialists while they are delivering.  And our own staff
and their spouses have expressed a wish to come here for obstetrics."

   Before that service opens, Schiff will add a specialist in menopause and in
reconstructive surgery to, as he notes, "deal with our aging patient
population." With the new obstetricians, that will be seven more doctors to push
through the medical school appointment process, seven more teachers to
supervise.

   How does Schiff do it, and still write, do research and practice his own
specialty of reproductive surgery? "He works," Dr. Keith Isaacson, one of the
new reproductive specialists, said, "from around 6:30 in the morning to 7 or 8
at night.

   "Somehow, he's still accessible.  To everyone.  He even has a meeting with
the secretarial staff every two weeks, to see how they're doing.  And in my
experience, that is unheard of in medicine." Members of his immediate staff have
some idea where the energy comes from: "Chocolate," his receptionist said.
"He'll eat anything if it's got chocolate on it."

   The in-vitro clinic, the final stage of the general fertility program at MGH,
has come last logically because the typical infertile couple will be put through
less dramatic procedures before going into an in-vitro attempt.  But from now
on, it will be at the heart of research into reproduction and research into
genetic diseases and their prevention.

   "We are not setting out to create an IVF center that's the largest or
something," Schiff explained.  "But it is a field marked by an increase in the
number of cases.  Women are pursuing careers, and the longer they wait the more
problems can occur, from sexually transmitted diseases to the diseases which are
just caused by exposure to the environment or are caused simply by the aging
process.  The longer you live, the longer you wait, the more chances there are
for any kind of problem to develop."

   It is this increasing population of couples who require IVF assistance that
opens the door for research. "The Massachusetts General Hospital is the largest
single medical research unit in the country," Schiff noted.  "If gene therapy -
the correction or cleansing or altering of genetic defects in the embryo - is
going to happen, it's going to happen here.  It will not occur in the local
hospital."

   Because of the total federal ban on any research involving fetal tissue
during the last 12 Republican years in the White House, basic research that
involves fertilized human eggs has been on hold in America.  Everything from
genetic screening (the equivalent of an amniocentesis procedure done before
pregnancy) to studying the relationship between cell growth in the pre-embryo
and subsequent diseases and disabilities has taken place abroad, primarily in
Australia and Great Britain.

   Genetic screening is happening - in Britain.  A couple undertaking IVF
treatment there were also both carriers of the recessive gene for cystic
fibrosis.  Doctors were able to extract a single cell from each of several
just-fertilized eggs, "pre-embryos," as researchers prefer to call them,
replicate the DNA and look for the marker for cystic fibrosis.  Fertilized eggs
(hormone treatment prior to IVF may produce as many as 20 eggs, usually no more
than a dozen) retrieved from the woman varied from being guaranteed to develop
the disease (carrying both recessive genes, one from each parent) to being
carriers with just one CF gene to being free of the disease.  By choosing and
transplanting the defect-free fertilized eggs, a healthy baby girl was the
result.

A unit with soul

    The possibilities are mind-boggling, if one imagines that screening might go
as far as something like responding to a couple's request for a child of a
particular sex.  But that would require a Dr. Frankenstein in some isolated
high-tech castle.  Such doings are not part of real medicine.  "We have an
ethics committee here just for the IVF unit," Schiff related, "composed of
medical staff, social workers and with a lay chairperson.  I want you to
understand that we are not here doing crazy things."

   But they are doing amazing things, unrelated to the possibility of tinkering
with the genetic code.  They have created, in the few months since the hospital
began equipping the IVF laboratory and training its staff, a unit with a soul.
While all reputable fertility clinics have social workers, while patients
everywhere are encouraged to join support groups, somehow Isaac Schiff has
turned the entire Vincent infertility program into a support system - it is not
an adjunct, it is the program.

   Roberta Palamara-Carnes, an executive with the Lotus software company in
Cambridge, is one of the first women to go through an IVF cycle at the Vincent,
this after an unhappy experience at another local hospital.  Her physician has
been Dr. Isaacson, and she remembers well that at the other hospital, it was
only the nurse who called with test results, never the doctor.

   "The place is incredibly busy," she said of the Vincent, "but I've never felt
as comfortable with a staff.  They know me.  They know the stress, the emotions
that take over, the physical pain.  Keith Isaacson was the one who put my mind
at ease.

   "After the first attempt, the coordinator called with the test results, that
is her job, and told me I wasn't pregnant.  And then Keith called, and I cried
on the phone for 45 minutes, and he never hung up, he stayed with me."

   This is not something doctors are trained to do, but doctors can be brought
on a staff because they do it.  Isaacson trained at the Hospital of the
University of Pennsylvania with Dr. Luigi Mastrioanni, probably the best-known
fertility specialist in the mid-Atlantic states.  "Schiff got him away from us,
we would have loved to have kept him here," Mastrioanni said in a brief
telephone interview.  "You can't train someone to be that way, to listen to
patients, they just come that way."

   Schiff is sensitive to the problems of human communication, a sometimes
uncommon trait in a doctor who has spent almost 30 years in operating rooms and
research laboratories.  "One of the problems in this field is that when couples
have an infertility problem, we don't have a language, a way of talking about
it," he remarked one afternoon. "If we have a friend with a broken hand, we can
say, 'Well, the cast will be off in a few weeks,' but what do we say to a member
of an infertile couple?  We say things like 'You don't know how lucky you are!'
And that is the last thing they want to hear.

   "We talk to them with jokes, we say the worst things in jest: 'Don't you know
which way to do it?' "

   On the other hand, Schiff will explain everything to a patient.  One of his
once-unfertile couples, John and Heather Tecce of Tewksbury, who were able to
conceive after Heather had corrective surgery, recall very well how carefully he
explains things: "Heve she made it.'

   "Let me put it this way," she said.  "I got treated like a customer, just
like anyone would want to be treated anywhere."

Communication is key

    Schiff's deliberate building of the department, and the sense of teamwork
that pervades everything and everyone, would be a study in management technique
- if there were one at work.  "Life is interesting," Schiff reflected. "In all
my career, or school, I've never had a minute's training in management, and
then, when you get the promotion, you are a manager.

   "I think, when I was at Brigham and Women's for more than 18 years, I
consciously looked around to see which divisions were succeeding and which
weren't - no, I wouldn't want to insult any of my former colleagues at the
Brigham - let me say, I looked to see which divisions were more successful than
others.  I concluded it had a lot to do with communication.

   "I know, when sometimes I would have an idea, or a suggestion, and if I were
slighted, if I were not really heard, I would say to myself, 'If I ever were in
a position of leadership, I wouldn't do that.'

   "I get my jollies from seeing the people in my department succeed.  When I
got the appointment here, a close friend said something about that to me:

   " 'Isaac,' he said, 'there are two kinds of people after they get to the top.
One of them will hold the ladder so that the other people can climb up, and the
other kind will kick the ladder so that he's the only one on top.'

   "This will be a department where physicians get their rewards from how they
treat their patients," Schiff said quietly, but firmly.  "Maybe we are living in
the past, but that is how things were done in days gone by.

   "It is harder now," he continued, "with insurance companies and the
government telling you how to do your work.  Thank heavens for the Vincent Club
endowers of the original Vincent Hospital for Women, and annual contributors of
some $ 100,000 to the Vincent service today; their support allows us to do
things now that may not be possible in the future."

   It is done, this emphasis on treating the patient, by example, not by
memorandum.  Just as the wall between the public clinic and private patients was
removed without remark, so are subtler matters handled.  Keith Isaacson has
watched, and been watched. "This is not just a program for the elite patient,"
he noted. "You can see that with the clinic.  And yes, we take 'charity'
patients, I believe we all do speaking of the hospital's teaching staff, I know
I do, and Dr. Schiff does.  How do I know?  Because when they are appropriate
candidates, he just sends them to me, that's how I know.

   "He has his passions," Isaacson continued, "and they are teaching and
treatment.  He loves being around the residents; he worries very much about how
we teach."

   "Every year," Schiff related with a slightly embarrassed smile, "they run a
course at the Harvard School of Public Health on how to manage a department in a
hospital.  It's just two weeks, every January, and I always mean to take it.
But something always comes up . . . you know, patients."

   Exactly, patients first.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, 1. GLOBE STAFF PHOTOS/LANE TURNER / Dr. Isaac Schiff: "I get my
jollies from seeing the people in my department succeed."(COLOR) 2. Patient
Roberta Palamara-Carnes with MGH's Vincent in-vitro fertilization team.  3.
GLOBE STAFF PHOTO/LANE TURNER / Dr. Keith Isaacson with IVF patient Roberta
Palamara-Carnes.

LOAD-DATE: March 5, 1993


                             1242 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                 March 4, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section D; Page 8; Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 439 words

HEADLINE: Dow Gains 3.51 Points, To 3,404.04

BYLINE: By ROBERT HURTADO

BODY:

   Stock prices moved higher yesterday as interest rates continued their
declines, making stocks a more attractive investment than bonds.

   The Dow Jones industrial average of blue-chip stocks gained 3.51 points to
close at 3,404.04. Volume on the New York Stock Exchange was 277.4 million
shares, slightly higher than Tuesday's volume of 275.9 million. Advances led
decliners by a ratio of 2 to 1.

S.& P. Up 1.36 Points

    The broader market also rose, with the Standard & Poor's 500 index up 1.36
points, to 449.26, just shy of the record close of 449.56 set on Feb. 4.

   "The market actually did better than the Dow depicted," said Hugh A. Johnson,
chief investment strategist for the First Albany Corporation. "There was
meaningful strength in the over-the-counter issues as the Nasdaq composite index
rose 6.20 points, to 683.92."

   Mr. Johnson also said he had been impressed by the strong trade volume. "It
has a tendency to dry up before the release of the monthly employment data,
which will be released on Friday," he said. "It appears as though investors are
becoming somewhat less cautious."

   Helping to underpin some of the strength yesterday were gains in bond prices,
which helped the yield on the 30-year Treasury bond fall to 6.78 percent. Aside
from making bond yields less competitive compared with those of stocks, Mr.
Johnson said, lower long-term interest rates "implies that corporations can
continue to refinance existing debt, which over time will help earnings."

Selloff in Timber Partnerships

    The biggest net loser on the New York Stock Exchange yesterday was Rayonier
Timberlands L.P., which lost more than 14 percent of its value, dropping $5.625,
to $34.125. The fall followed an article in The New York Times yesterday saying
investors buying units of the logging company for their yield would likely lose
money in the long term because of the terms of the partnership agreement
governing the securities. The selloff spread to IP Timberlands Ltd., another
limited partnership in the timber industry, which lost $2.375 to close at
$22.625.

   Genetic Therapy rose $2.125, to $12.625, after the company said that the
Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee of the National Institutes of Health had
approved two of its human gene trials to treat cystic fibrosis. The Genzyme
Corporation rose $1.625, to $35.125. The biotech company reported fourth-quarter
earnings of 33 cents a share against 30 cents a year earlier. Chemtrak Inc. rose
$2.75, to $15, after the Food and Drug Administration gave the medical supplies
company clearance to sell its single-use cholesterol test products in the United
States.

GRAPHIC: Table: "The Favorite Stocks" shows performance of the 15 issues with
the most shareholders.

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 1993


                             1243 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1993 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                     MARCH 4, 1993, THURSDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D2

LENGTH: 324 words

HEADLINE: Biotech Startup Gets Genentech's Backing
 South S.F. firm to take 20% stake in GenVec

BYLINE: Alex Barnum, Chronicle Staff Writer

BODY:

    Genentech Inc. said yesterday it will invest $ 17 million in a new
biotechnology company that hopes to develop gene therapy treatments for cystic
fibrosis and other life-threatening illnesses.

   The South San Francisco biotechnology pioneer will invest $ 4 million for a
20 percent stake in GenVec, which will be based in Maryland, and $ 13 million in
research support and other payments during the next five years.

   In exchange, Genentech will receive marketing rights to any gene therapy
treatment developed for cystic fibrosis.

   In cystic fibrosis, a defective gene causes thick mucus to accumulate in the
lungs, impairing breathing and causing infections. It is the most common genetic
disease among whites, afflicting 30,000 children and young adults in the United
States. Half die by the age of 29.

   Genentech has developed its own treatment for the disease, a drug called
Pulmozyme that has dramatically reduced infections and improved lung function in
clinical trials. The company plans to file for marketing approval by the end of
the month.

   While promising, Pulmozyme does not address the underlying genetic cause of
the disease. And experts say the best hope for a cure is gene therapy, which
involves replacing a patient's defective genes with healthy new ones.

   GenVec's founder is Dr. Ronald Crystal, a renowned expert on lung diseases
and gene therapy. Crystal said yesterday he is leaving his post at the National
Institutes of Health to join the Cornell Medical Center in New York City, where
his lab will collaborate with GenVec.

   Crystal has pioneered a promising gene therapy approach that uses inactivated
versions of the virus that causes the common cold as a vehicle for delivering
the healthy genes into lung cells of cystic fibrosis patients.

   Crystal heads one of five teams of researchers that have recently received
approval to begin testing gene therapy approaches to cystic fibrosis in human
patients.



                             1244 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1993 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                     March 4, 1993, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: MONEY; Pg. 3B

LENGTH: 601 words

HEADLINE: Dow up 3.51 on continued bond rally

BYLINE: Linda Busche

BODY:

    Stocks edged higher in cautious trading Wednesday.

   The Dow Jones industrial average rose 3.51 points 3404.04. The Standard &
Poor's 500 index rose 1.36 points to 449.26. The NASDAQ composite also rose.
Winners beat losers 1,296 to 632 on the New York Stock Exchange, where volume
was 277 million shares.

   Behind the market: Stocks added to Tuesday's gains, thanks partly to the bond
market, where a lingering rally drove the 30-year bond yield to a 20-year low
(story, 1B). The stock market also benefited from hopes for higher earnings.

   Analysts say a change in either interest rates or earnings optimism could
mean trouble for stocks. "We can't afford to have those working against us,"
says Greg Drahuschak, vice president of research at Janney Montgomery Scott in
Pittsburgh.

   Many investors believe stocks will continue to rise and are jumping in,
afraid they'll miss out. "We haven't gotten to the stage where people are just
throwing money at anything," Drahuschak says. "It might not come to that for
another couple hundred points (gain in the Dow)."

   Enough uncertainty remained to dampen trading part of Wednesday. "It looked
pretty sloppy," says Ed Laux, head trader at Kidder Peabody. "But the bond
market took off again and got enough things going to drag the rest of the market
along."

   Market highlights: Financial-services stocks got a boost from falling
interest rates. Federal National Mortgage added 1 to $ 82, Bankers Trust rose 1
1/8 to $ 69 1/2, SunTrust Banks gained 1 7/8 to $ 48, NationsBank climbed 1 1/4
to $ 56, Wells Fargo rose 1 1/8 to $ 103 3/8 and Countrywide Credit advanced 1
1/8 to $ 34 7/8. Savings and loan Metropolitan Financial rose 1 3/8 to $ 18 3/4
on positive comments from Merrill Lynch.

   Tobacco stocks eased on news that a bill will be introduced in Congress to
raise the tax on cigarettes to $ 1 from 24 cents a pack. Philip Morris lost 7/8
to $ 66 5/8, RJR Reynolds fell 1/4 to $ 8 3/4 and American Brands lost 1/4 to $
34 5/8.

   Biotechnology stocks were strong again. Genetic Therapy climbed 2 1/8 to $ 12
5/8 after the National Institutes of Health approved the company's human gene
therapy to treat cystic fibrosis on a trial basis. Alpha 1 Biomedicals was up
5/8 to $ 10 5/8. Morgan Stanley said the stock could rise to $ 26 within a year.
Curative Technologies gained 1 1/8 to $ 6 1/2 after DAK Securities said the
stock could hit $ 15 in a year. Also up: Genzyme, 1 5/8 to $ 35 1/8, and ONCOR,
3/4 to $ 7.

   Chemtrak climbed 2 3/4 to $ 15. Tuesday, the Food and Drug Administration
approved the medical-test maker's home-use cholesterol tests.

   Bargain-hunting continued to boost the battered health-care stock group.
(Street Talk, left.) Healthsource rose 3 1/4 to $ 31 1/8, Rotech Medical gained
1 1/4 to $ 13 1/4 and US HealthCare climbed 2 1/8 to $ 50 1/4. Qual-Med, a
company that manages health-maintenance organizations, slumped 1 1/4 to $ 13 1/2
after
Salomon Bros. downgraded the stock to hold from buy.     AST

Research fell 1 7/8 to $ 15 1/8. The personal-computer company said
price-cutting to gain market share is hurting its earnings (Company Spotlight,
above).

   Analysts' opinions moved several stocks: Chevron fell 1 3/4 to $ 78 after
Merrill Lynch made negative comments on the oil company. Clean Harbors rose 1
1/4 to $ 16 1/4. First Boston repeated a strong buy rating on the provider of
hazardous-waste management services. Developer Del Webb fell 3/4 to $ 15 3/8 on
negative comments from Kidder Peabody. Imperial Chemical rose 2 3/4 to $ 73 3/8
on positive comments from PaineWebber.


                             1245 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1993 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                     March 4, 1993, Thursday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; PAGE D12

LENGTH: 325 words

HEADLINE: New Area Company to Work on Gene Therapy

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Daniel Southerland, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   A group that includes a top scientist from the National Institutes of Health
yesterday announced the formation of a new biotechnology company that will
locate in Montgomery County.

   The company, GenVec, will work to develop gene therapy drugs for cystic
fibrosis and other diseases.

   Ronald G. Crystal, 51, chief of the pulmonary branch of the National Heart,
Lung, and Blood Institute at the National Institutes of Health, is a founder of
the company and its chief scientific adviser. Many Montgomery County start-up
biotech firms hope to commercialize NIH research.

   GenVec said yesterday that Genentech Inc., a big San Francisco biotech
company, will collaborate with the new company, providing research support and
investments that could amount to as much as $ 17 million. Genentech will hold
marketing rights for any gene therapy product the company develops for cystic
fibrosis.

   Until November, Crystal was collaborating with another Montgomery County
biotech company, Genetic Therapy Inc. of Gaithersburg, which also is looking for
cystic fibrosis gene therapy drugs.

   Yesterday, Genetic Therapy announced that the NIH has approved two human
trials of gene therapy, including one for brain cancer and another for cystic
fibrosis. NIH approval is an early step; commercialization could be far off. The
company has done other gene therapy trials, but this is the first for cystic
fibrosis.


   Gene therapy involves inserting genes into a cell of an individual to
compensate for a deficiency or to give the cell a new characteristic. Cystic
fibrosis is a fatal lung disease that afflicts 30,000 Americans.

   Gene therapy is relatively new -- the first test of the procedure on humans
was conducted in September 1990 by NIH scientists working with Genetic Therapy
Inc.

   At the NIH, Crystal pioneered the use of a disabled version of the virus
responsible for the common cold as a method for implanting healthy genes into
lung cells.


GRAPHIC: PHOTO, RONALD G. CRYSTAL

LOAD-DATE: October 14, 1993


                             1246 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1993 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                  March 3, 1993, WEDNESDAY, FIVE STAR Edition

SECTION: EVERYDAY MAGAZINE; Pg. 4F

LENGTH: 229 words

HEADLINE: SENIOR SCOOP

BODY:


   Gene therapy will be routine in future treatment of heart diseases, predicts
Dr. R. Sanders Williams, chairman of the cardiology division of the Southwestern
Medical Center of the University of Texas at Dallas.

   Here are some of his predictions:

   Within a decade, patients will undergo "genotyping" as part of a routine
medical exam to determine their risk for future cardiovascular disease. Some
at-risk patients will be subjects for intensive preventive efforts.

   Genetic engineering of lab animals will permit transplantation of animal
hearts or other organs into humans without rejection by the immune system.

   Defective genes will be replaced by transferring functioning genes into the
tissues.

   "Regulatory genes" will be implanted in damaged hearts to induce regeneration
of muscle cells.

   The blood test used widely to screen for prostate cancer, called prostate
specific antigens (PSA), often is interpreted incorrectly, reports Dr.  Robert
Kane, a Harvard Medical School radiologist.

   Kane says the PSA test missed one-third of 106 cancers detected in a study of
2,000 men by the American Cancer Society. Furthermore, the test mistakenly
suggested that about one-fifth of the men screened had cancer when they did not.

   More cancers would be detected if the sounding device were used for patients
with lower PSA readings, he suggested.

LOAD-DATE: September 29, 1993


                             1247 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1993 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle



                     March 2, 1993, Tuesday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: A; National briefs; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 554 words

HEADLINE: National briefs

BYLINE: Houston Chronicle News Services

BODY:

   Low profile for Kevorkian

    DETROIT -- Dr. Jack Kevorkian won't assist in another suicide
until a court rules on an attempt to block a new Michigan law
banning the practice, an attorney for the retired pathologist said.

   The American Civil Liberties Union sued to overturn the law
banning assisted suicide, claiming that it violates the right to
privacy and the right to due process as guaranteed by the state and
U.S.constitutions.

   John Truscott, a spokesman for Gov. John Engler, said he was
confident that the law, which went into effect Thursday, would
stand up to a legal challenge.

   Kevorkian has said he will defy the ban.  He has helped 15
people kill themselves since 1990.  He is not a plaintiff in the
lawsuit.



   Smog standard will stand

    WASHINGTON -- The Environmental Protection Agency confirmed
the Bush administration's decision not to revise the federal
air-quality standard for smog, but pledged to accelerate a review
of new data and revise the standard as soon as possible.

   New studies on the effect of smog, or ground-level ozone,
published since early 1989 raise serious questions about the
adequacy of the existing standard, according to environmentalists.

   But the EPA did not take those data into account because the
studies had not yet undergone the rigorous evaluation mandated
under the nation's clean air laws.

   EPA Administrator Carol Browner decided to finalize the
agency's proposed decision last August to leave the ozone standard
unchanged, but she has asked the agency staff to do everything
possible to accelerate review of new data.



   Parents charged in fire

   DETROIT -- The parents of seven children killed in a house
fire two weeks ago were charged with manslaughter for leaving them
locked alone inside the home, prosecutors said.

   Wayne County Prosecutor John O'Hair said Leroy Lyons, 38, and
Shereese Williams, 35, were charged with seven counts of
manslaughter, based upon probable cause to believe that they were
guilty of gross negligence that directly caused or resulted in the
death of the seven children.

   Lyons and Williams had left the children alone in the house
on the afternoon of Feb. 17 after Lyons had attempted to thaw a
frozen pipe by burning newspapers underneath the kitchen floor.

   The smoldering papers reignited after the two left, billowing
thick smoke into the house and killing the children, according to
fire officials.  The four boys and three girls, all 9 or under,
could not escape the fire because of padlocked iron security bars
on all but one of the windows.



   Brain cancer therapy

   WASHINGTON -- Under an experimental therapy approved by a
federal committee, scientists will attack brain cancers by
infecting tumor cells with a herpes gene and then killing the
cancer with a herpes drug.

   The experimental therapy, proposed by medical scientists at
the University of Iowa, was approved unanimously by a National
Institutes of Health committee.  It now must be approved by the NIH
director and by the Food and Drug Administration.

   The gene therapy technique has been tested extensively in
mice and rats.  The researchers said they found that the
fast-growing tumor cells were the only cells in the brain that
would integrate, or take in, the altered virus.


LOAD-DATE: March 3, 1993


                             1248 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1993 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                      March 2, 1993, Tuesday, Home Edition

SECTION: View; Part E; Page 1; Column 2; View Desk

LENGTH: 1645 words

HEADLINE: STALKING A KILLER

BYLINE: By SHARI ROAN, TIMES HEALTH WRITER

BODY:

   Doris Goldman is the quintessential professional. On a recent weekday, she is
in her glass-walled office early, having made the short walk from a modern
condominium complex across the street, home to hard-core Irvine business
executives who can't waste time on a long commute.

   She has a lot on her mind today: the Chicago Tribune, Philadelphia Inquirer,
20-20. She has to get through to all of them. Twist their arms. Make them
listen. The media can reach a lot of people fast.

   Time is precious, so very precious. This is something Goldman knows painfully
well.

   She picks up a plastic photo cube on her desk showing pictures of her three
children when each was a young adult. Nancy, her oldest daughter, lives in
Encino. Sharon and Jack are dead.

   Time ran out.

   If Goldman has her way, no one will ever die again from long QT syndrome, the
awkward name for the cardiac disorder that killed her two vibrant, athletic
children without warning. She has made it her responsibility to warn others
about the disease.

   "Every place a story runs on this, we are bombarded with calls," she says,
shuffling a stack of newspaper clippings.

   When Goldman picks up the phone to dial a reporter, she is polite but firm
and to the point. Her voice does not waver.

   "My son died at 20 . . . my daughter at age 29. . . . A dominant gene causes
long QT. . . . Other families -- no one knows just how many -- carry the gene
too. . . . Medication can control it. . . . Often the young person faints for no
apparent reason. . . . But the first symptom is sometimes sudden death."

   Please write something, Goldman beseeches. Not enough people know about long
QT.

   And she is right.

   In the last two years, researchers have begun to dramatically re-evaluate
information on long QT syndrome, which is caused by a malfunction of the heart's
electrical system, leading it to beat wildly -- and sometimes to stop.

   The more doctors find out, they more they raise their estimates on the number
of people who may carry the gene. Previously, the disorder was believed to
affect about one person in 10,000, but that figure is now thought to be far too
low.

   "We just don't know how common it is," says Dr. G. Michael Vincent of the
University of Utah, where pioneering work on long QT has been done. "We know it
is more under-recognized than rare. But now a lot more families are being
identified."

   The explosion of information on the disorder stems from two sources: One is
the work of a handful of researchers, including the University of Utah group,
which identified a genetic marker for the syndrome in 1991.

   The other source is Goldman. Because of her efforts to alert unsuspecting
families, dozens of families around the nation are being tested for the
disorder.

   "She's fantastic," says Vincent. "Her ability to tell her story has been
extraordinarily important" in helping establish the Sudden Arrhythmia Death
Syndromes (SADS) Foundation at LDS Hospital in Salt Lake City to identify long
QT families and to support research.

   "I can't imagine the kind of strength Doris has," says Toni DeBilzan, a
Laguna Hills woman who lost her 19-year-old son, Josh Sergio, to long QT in
1991. "I can't really put into words how I feel about Doris." The DeBilzan
family discovered they carry the gene after a story on Goldman appeared last
year in the Orange County Register.

   For her part, Goldman seems born to take charge. She has a resonant voice,
which masks the perpetual lump in her throat. As she speaks, she crumples a
tissue in one fist.

   "I'm healthy because I'm throwing myself into this," she says. "I've got to
make a positive out of a negative."

   Besides, Goldman has other family members who carry the gene to think about.
Sharon's son, Jacob, who was 5 months old when his mother died in 1991, has been
found to be a carrier.

   "By the time Jacob ponders whether or not to have children, I hope we have
some sort of genetic therapy for this," Goldman says. "Or I hope we at least
have enough awareness that the medical community will consider the possibility
of long QT whenever a young person faints."

   Jack Toran, Goldman's son, died in 1979 while on a camping trip in Grand
Teton National Park. He had been working in construction in Wyoming before
taking the short trek. Jack told his mother that he'd call her when he and his
friends emerged from the park.

   A few days after Jack's trip began, Doris received a phone call about 11:30
one night. She recalls the conversation this way:

   "Are you Jack Toran's mother?"

   "Is he OK?"

   "Didn't anyone call you? This is the coroner calling from Jackson Hole, Wyo."

   "Was he in an accident?"

   "No. He died peacefully in his sleep."

   Apart from the shock of her son's death, the words themselves made no sense
to Goldman. Died peacefully in his sleep. How could that be? He was a young man,
an athlete. He had never been seriously ill.

   For almost two years, the family searched for a cause of death. The FBI
investigated. Soil samples were taken in search of an unknown toxin.

   Jack's camping buddies had told Goldman that Jack had fainted at work a week
before his death. Although the information meant little to Goldman at the time,
it gave her chills two years later.

   Sharon had just started college at the University of Tampa.

   "Sharon called me in a panic and told me that she had fainted," Goldman
recalls. "That was the first inkling I had that something was happening to my
children that might be hereditary."

   Sharon, a champion water-skier and runner, was examined thoroughly and found
to have two possible heart problems: a slow, irregular heartbeat common among
athletes and a mitral valve prolapse, a relatively common defect that is usually
not serious. Neither was seen as a possible cause of sudden death.

   But a year later, Sharon collapsed while walking across her dormitory room.
Her heart stopped, and she was without oxygen for several minutes. When Goldman
arrived in Tampa the next morning, Sharon was in a coma.

   "A cardiologist sat me down and said there are three things that can cause
cardiac arrest in a young person," Goldman recalls. "One was long QT. I said,
'Well, whatever it is, it has to be genetic.' "

   Goldman was now certain that whatever killed Jack was trying to kill Sharon.

   Sharon emerged from the coma in two weeks and then underwent six years of
grueling rehabilitation because of brain damage caused by the loss of oxygen.
She was put on beta blockers, a medication that controls the heart's rhythms.
Still, no one was certain what caused Jack's and Sharon's problems.

   Sharon married John Turner in 1988 and moved to Encino, near Nancy. And
Goldman, who had been living in Philadelphia, soon moved to Orange County to
become area director of the Jewish American Committee.

   Sharon gave birth to Jacob in February, 1991, and the happy new mother seemed
to be thriving.

   In May of that year, Goldman, an avid newspaper reader, saw an article on
doctors finding a genetic marker for the long QT syndrome, "an inherited heart
disorder that kills young and otherwise robust people without warning," the
article said.

   That had to be it, Goldman told herself. She faxed the article to the
family's cardiologist, Dr. William J. Mandel in Beverly Hills. He urged Goldman
to contact the Utah researchers.

   Sharon's records were sent to Utah. She was awaiting an appointment to be
examined there when she died in her sleep.

   Even though Sharon was taking beta blockers -- which are now prescribed for
people with long QT -- doctors now believe the dose was too low.

   And long QT was what Sharon and Jack had. It is what Jacob and Nancy and
Doris and Doris' sister, her sister's two children and her first cousins have.

   It took only a few weeks after Sharon's death to find out, after Jacob and
Nancy were evaluated in Utah.

   It is not easy to identify long QT, which is named after an abnormally
prolonged interval on an electrocardiogram. Researchers can do expensive DNA
typing to explore a family's genetic makeup to identify it. But in most cases,
diagnosis must be made by looking at an electrocardiogram. And the diagnosis
often is missed, Vincent says, because the characteristics do not always show
up.

   Usually, the disorder affects children and young adults. After age 40, people
with long QT rarely die from it. Sudden death in young people can be
precipitated by a stressful event, such as diving into a cold pool or being
anxious.

   "When a doctor sees a young person who is having episodes of loss of
consciousness, and it's not immediately apparent why that is, they should think
of long QT syndrome," Vincent says.

   So, while doctors like Vincent and Mandel give seminars to their colleagues
and publish papers, volunteers like Goldman ring up reporters, counsel
frightened families -- and save more lives.

   The families that are identified with long QT agree that discovering you have
the gene is unnerving, but it's better than wondering why people in your family
die without reason.

   "When you have an answer, a part of you is relieved. You go, 'OK, how do you
deal with it?' But there is still some fear," DeBilzan says.

   In part because of the recent awareness, the SADS Foundation has established
a hot line, (800) STOP-SAD, to help families who think they may be affected by
the disorder.

   "A lot of times, with unexplained deaths, people will tune into an article
like this and say, 'Maybe that's what happened,' " Mandel explains. "Many times,
it's not related. But if you can identify even one family, it's worth it."

   And so, the calls come in. Goldman is ready.

   She ticks off the cities where stories on her have appeared and where
families have been identified. San Antonio. Las Vegas. New Orleans. St.
Petersburg.

   "The whole thing is gelling now," she says, with some satisfaction. "The
publicity is bringing all these people out who didn't have a clue."

GRAPHIC: Photo, COLOR, Doris Goldman, left, who is pursuing the ailment that is
killing her family, with daughter, Nancy, and grandson Ryan, 5.  DAVID BOHRER /
Los Angeles Times; Photo, COLOR, John Turner with son, Jacob, 2, is Goldman's
son-in-law. His wife, Sharon, died of long QT 5 months after Jacob, who also has
it, was born.


                             1249 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1993 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                      March 2, 1993, Tuesday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 10; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 223 words

HEADLINE: HERPES THERAPY FOR BRAIN CANCER BACKED BY PANEL

BYLINE: From Associated Press

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   Scientists will attack brain cancers by infecting tumor cells with a herpes
gene and then killing the cancer with a herpes drug, under an experimental
therapy approved by a federal committee Monday.

   The experimental therapy, proposed by medical scientists at the University of
Iowa, was approved unanimously Monday by a National Institutes of Health
committee. It now must be approved by the NIH director and by the Food and Drug
Administration.

   Dr. Kenneth W. Culver, an NIH researcher who is moving to Iowa to undertake
the experimental trial, said the technique already has been tried on five
patients at the NIH. He said they have developed no toxic reactions, but it is
too early to determine if there has been improvement in the cancers.

   Under the system proposed, patients suffering from malignant brain cancer,
which is almost inevitably fatal, would undergo surgery to remove as much of the
tumor as possible.

   After surgery, the patients would be infused with a virus that has been
genetically altered so that it is not infectious and so that it contains a gene
from the herpes simplex virus.

   Once inside the brain, the genetically altered virus would infect any
remaining tumor cells.

   Only brain cancer patients who have failed to improve after standard
therapies would be considered for the experimental trials.


                             1250 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                  March 2, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Page 10; Column 3; Science Desk

LENGTH: 518 words

HEADLINE: Trial of Herpes-Gene Therapy for Brain Cancer Is Backed

BYLINE: AP

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 1

BODY:

   In an experimental gene therapy approved by a Federal committee today,
scientists will attack brain cancers by infecting tumor cells with a herpes gene
and then killing the cancer with a herpes drug.

   The experimental therapy, proposed by medical scientists at the University of
Iowa, was approved unanimously by a National Institutes of Health committee. It
now needs the approval of the Director of the Ntional Institutes of Health and
of the Food and Drug Administration.

    Dr. Kenneth W. Culver, an N.I.H. researcher who is going to Iowa to
undertake the experimental trial, said the technique had already been tried on
five patients at the N.I.H. He said that the patients had developed no toxic
reactions to the therapy but that it was too early to determine if there had
been improvement in the cancers.

   "The therapy we'll use in Iowa will be an advance in the sense that we're
going to try a different surgical approach," said Dr. Culver.

   Members of an N.I.H. panel called the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee
approved the use of the experimental technique for 15 patients. If the treatment
proves itself, the panel said, the investigators could then request permission
for 15 more patients.

   Under the system proposed, patients suffering from a brain cancer that is
almost inevitably fatal would undergo surgery to remove as much of the tumor as
possible.

   After surgery, the patients would be infused with a virus that has been
genetically altered so that it is not infectious and contains a gene from the
herpes simplex virus. The herpes gene is sensitive to a drug called ganciclovir.
Once inside the brain, the genetically altered virus would infect any remaining
tumor cells, establishing the herpes gene inside the cancer cells.

   Dr. Culver said that once the tumors were infected by the virus, the patients
would be given ganciclovir. This drug would kill both the virus and the brain
tumor cells, he said.

   "The only place that the drug would cause any toxicity is in the cells with
the herpes gene," Dr. Culver said.

   In effect, he said, the gene transfer makes the cancer cells more sensitive
to a type of chemotherapy.

   Only brain cancer patients who have failed to improve after standard
therapies will be considered for the experimental trials. Patients who fail
standard therapies usually survive for only a few weeks to a few months.

   Dr. Culver said that a cell line that will be used already is in development
by Genetic Therapy Inc., a Gaithersburg, Md., drug maker.

   The gene therapy technique has been tested extensively in mice and rats. The
researchers said that they had found that the fast-growing tumor cells were the
only cells in the brain that would integrate, or take in, the altered virus.

   Gene therapy against brain cancer is receiving increased research attention.
In January, researchers in San Diego treated a 51-year-old woman with her own
cells, genetically altered to contain a gene for interleukin 2, a protein that
bolsters the attack cells in the immune system. The theory is that these immune
system cells would then attack the brain tumor.

LOAD-DATE: March 3, 1993


                             1251 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1993 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                   FEBRUARY 27, 1993, SATURDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A22

LENGTH: 895 words

HEADLINE: UCSF Center to Seek Genetic Link to Heart Disease
 New research facility to get $ 20 million from

BYLINE: David Perlman, Chronicle Science Editor

BODY:

    A major basic research center to study the genetic forces at work in heart
disease will be opened at the University of California in San Francisco with $
20 million of no-strings financing from a giant Japanese drug company, The
Chronicle has learned.

   The scientific team will be headed by Dr. Lawrence Williams, associate
director of the UCSF Cardiovascular Research Institute and a pioneer in studying
how genes are involved in the clogging of arteries that cause heart attacks and
strokes. Those two disorders alone kill an estimated 700,000 Americans each
year.

   Daichi Pharmaceutical Co. of Tokyo, a company specializing in a wide range of
prescription drugs that are sold worldwide, will finance the center for the next
five years.

   Williams' own research and his UCSF laboratory are financed by the Howard
Hughes Medical Institute. The organization spends nearly $ 200 million a year
supporting biomedical research around the country.  There are 17 Hughes
investigators at UCSF, who receive $ 12 million from the institute a year.

   STRICT CONFLICT RULES

   Based in Bethesda, Md., the Hughes organization has extremely strict rules
barring its investigators from any possible conflict of interest in their
research. They are forbidden to provide research results to companies on an
exclusive basis, they cannot have commercial ties to private companies working
in their fields, and all their work must be published in open scientific
literature.

   According to Karl Hittelman, associate vice chancellor at UCSF, the agreement
with Daichi will conform to all of the university's rules on conflict of
interest, freedom of scientific research and open publication.

   UC policy requires that the university itself must hold any patents that
result from the work of its scientists. UC then negotiates the terms of any
licensing agreements with private companies. In the case of biomedical research,
Hittelman said, the policy is designed to prevent any one drug company from
securing exclusive rights to develop products based on university research and
then locking up the discovery to prevent competing firms from pushing to develop
similar drugs.

   The focus on preventing conflict of interest between scientists and private
industry has become a major political concern in recent years as Congress has
pushed universities and federal research agencies, such as the National
Institutes of Health, to speed the process of moving new research from the
laboratory to the factory.  That process, known as ''technology transfer'' has
in the past involved serious pitfalls, including the amassing of extraordinary
profits, for many senior scientists.

   CONGRESS INVESTIGATING

   Congressional committees are investigating several recent instances where
pioneering researchers at universities and nonprofit institutes founded their
own small companies, bought the stock for pennies, and then made millions when
giant industrial firms bought the startup outfits. But Hittelman termed the UC
arrangement with the Japanese drug firm ''a pure vanilla agreement.''

   The only privilege Daichi will get from its $ 20 million contribution,
Hittelman said, will be a first chance to negotiate licensing agreements on
patents that may result from the work at the new research center. And those
agreements will have to conform to UC's own rules against licensing what amounts
to ''blocking patents'' that sequester new discoveries.

   ''The science will belong to everybody,'' Williams said, ''and we'll never be
a group that does the drug company's work.'' As a Hughes investigator, Williams
will have no commercial interest in Daichi, nor will any of the scientists on
the research team.

   The $ 20 million in drug company money, Williams said, will enable UCSF's
Cardiovascular Research Institute to recruit some of the nation's best senior
research scientists and post-doctoral fellows, who will focus primarily on the
causes and possible treatment of atherosclerosis, which accounts for 95 percent
of all heart disease.  The disorder arises when arteries, particularly those
that nourish the coronary arteries, become clogged or totally blocked with hard,
fatty deposits called plaque.

   Williams has pioneered in the study and cloning of genes that control the
formation of proteins called growth factors, which contribute to the clogging of
arteries by stimulating smooth muscle cells in the arteries to multiply and
grow.

   Scientists at the new UCSF research center will concentrate on three vital
approaches, Williams said. One project will investigate the molecular mechanisms
that underlie the growth of muscle cells and the formation of plaque -- a quest
that could lead to the precise design of new drugs capable of disrupting the
formation of plaque, he said.

   Another project will begin a search for techniques of gene therapy against
atherosclerosis -- an effort to alter the genes inside blood vessels that
control the formation of plaque cells that cause blood clots to form.

   A third research team will try to create strains of mice with genetic defects
that cause atherosclerosis. Studying those mice could clear up the basic
mysteries surrounding the precise genetic nature of the disorder.

   The financing agreement with the Japanese company is expected to be completed
within a few months, according to Hittelman, and will require approval by the UC
regents.



                             1252 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1993 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                          February 24, 1993 Wednesday

SECTION: LIFESTYLE; Pg. E-1

LENGTH: 1525 words

HEADLINE: Sounds of progress;
Research into genetic deafness moving forward with help from `dancing' mouse,
new technology

BYLINE: SCOTT LaFEE

BODY:

   For scientists seeking answers to the causes and cures of genetic deafness,
there is mostly silence. No one knows precisely how much of deafness is caused
by genetics.

   The inner ear, its workings and the influences upon it, are still largely an
unsolved medical mystery. Finding solutions will require some extraordinary
leaps in knowledge, said William J. Kimberling of the Center for Hereditary
Communication Disorders at the Boys Town National Research Hospital in Omaha,
Neb. Nonetheless, Kimberling predicted possible tangible medical benefits within
20 years. [] First, otolaryngologists (medical specialists in disorders of the
ear, nose and throat) hope to devise screening mechanisms to allow people to
determine whether they bear the combination of genetic material necessary to
produce offspring with hearing loss diseases like Usher syndrome. [] Second,
possible gene therapies that treat congenital or progressive hearing loss by
providing the missing genes. "If the genetic problem is a deficiency in some
enzyme or biochemical," said Allen Ryan, a professor of otolaryngology at UCSD,
"you might be able to take a medicine and solve the problem.

   Of course, we haven't found any like that yet." There is even the potential
of treating some deafness diseases in the womb. "If you can introduce the
therapy in the beginning, in vitro, the advantage is that you might be making
the repair permanent," said Ryan. [] And third, researchers may someday learn
how to reconstruct or rebuild the inner ear, said Kimberling.

   "Perhaps by learning how to turn on the genes that would regenerate hair
cells," he said. Unexpected luck But getting there will require hard work and,
perhaps, more serendipitous events like the one that happened at UCSD more than
four years ago. In 1988, in a process called insertional mutagenesis, scientists
at UCSD microscopically injected a new gene into the nucleus of a mouse egg. The
scientists, led by cancer researcher Michael G. Rosenfeld, were interested in
neuronal development and the consequences of altering specific genes at an early
stage of life. What happened next, however, was unexpected. They created a mouse
that danced. "It was an accident," said lab technician Kris Kalla, who performed
the process and later identified the resulting female mouse as distinctly
different. "She didn't have any orientation," said Kalla.

   "It was circle, circle, circle.

   She couldn't stay still but she had trouble figuring out where to go." A
dancing mouse -- or more precisely, a head-bobbing, disoriented transgenic
rodent unable to walk straight -- didn't have much to do with Rosenfeld's
research, but it did offer a dramatic opportunity for scientists attempting to
unravel the genetic mysteries of the ear. "It may have been an accident," said
Ryan, "but it provided us with a very nice model." Specifically, the mouse
(nicknamed Wako) and its offspring became a model or phenotype for a particular
type of balance disorder related to the inner ear -- one that apparently was
triggered by either the inserted gene or by its effect on one or more other
genes. More important, researchers knew where the inserted gene had settled
among the thousands of genes comprising Waco's genome.

   They didn't know which other genes its presence may have affected, but they
had significantly narrowed the field. "It eliminated thousands of base pairs,"
said Rick Friedman, a Howard Hughes Medical Institute fellow at UCSD who has
since learned how to artificially clone that particular region of the mouse's
genome. "We're still far away.

   We've mapped close to the responsible gene or genes and eliminated some
others, but we've still got a huge amount of DNA left." Not easy to study
Despite the fact more than 17 million Americans suffer hearing loss due at least
in part to genetics, research into the hereditary diseases that cause deafness
or loss of balance is relatively new, said Kimberling. "It's only been in the
past 10 years that the research has really taken off.

   In 1980, when I used to go to otolaryngology meetings, I was the only
geneticist.

   Now when I go, there are five or six." One reason is the location of the
subject itself.

   The inner ear is not an easy organ to reach or study. "It's very difficult to
get to, very small and very delicate," said UCSD's Ryan.

   "You can't just go into the ear and take out a piece for a biopsy. Doing that
would destroy the ear." Moreover, animal research (which must precede any done
with humans) doesn't provide a wealth of material.

   "A mouse's inner ear is buried in bone and very, very tiny," said Ryan.

   "We're talking about being able to extract nanograms, micrograms of messenger
RNA from a single mouse.

   It takes 1,000 mice to get the same amount of RNA from the ear that you can
get from one mouse leg muscle." Technological advances like the polymerase chain
reaction (PCR), a biochemical process that allows scientists to replicate and
magnify tiny bits of DNA, have made research easier.

   But there remains the problem of the inner ear's complexity and the relative
lack of clues in non-syndromic deafness, deafness that occurs in isolation,
without other symptoms. "There are probably seven to 150 different genes
involved in one kind of non-syndromic deafness," said Kimberling.

   "That's roughly the equivalent to the number of genes involved in the eye.

   But when there's a problem with the eye, an ophthalmologist can look inside
and see colors and patterns that will give him an idea of what's going on.

   Our only clue is that somebody can't hear.

   That's like asking an ophthalmologist to do his work with the eyelid closed."
As a result, much of the genetic research into deafness has been focused on
syndromic diseases or hearing impairments that present a collection of symptoms
or clues, from blindness to the color of one's hair. Syndromic deafness is
easier to study because it involves a combination of genetic characteristics,
rather than just one as in non-syndromic deafness. Each characteristic provides
clues to researchers and a better chance of understanding the underlying genetic
reasons for the disease. In Omaha, Kimberling is leading an effort to map and
describe the genes responsible for Usher syndrome. The syndrome is characterized
by moderate to severe hearing loss, gradual blindness and, occasionally, the
complete loss of balance.

   It affects approximately one out of every 18,000 people and, according to
Kimberling, "is the most common, single cause of combined deafness and
blindness." Kimberling, a geneticist by training, first became interested in
Usher syndrome in 1984 because it represented "the largest identifiable fraction
of hereditary deafness, about 10 percent" and because earlier research seemed to
suggest only one or two genes were responsible. "It seemed to be a relatively
homogeneous disease," said Kimberling. Not what it seemed Slow but steady
progress, however, has proved the opposite to be true.

   Last year, Kimberling and his colleagues in Omaha successfully mapped the
relative location of two genes responsible for the syndrome on a pair of the 23
chromosomes found in every cell of the body.

   Related work by Richard Smith and others at the University of Iowa found a
third responsible gene on a different part of one of the chromosomes. "Now it
looks like there are at least five genes involved," said Kimberling. Multiple
genes are also responsible for Waardenburg's syndrome, which is usually
identifiable by several traits in combination.

   Among them: deafness, widely spaced eyes that are pinched at the corners, a
white forelock of hair, fused eyebrows and abnormalities in the upper limbs. The
syndrome accounts for 2 percent to 3 percent of the 1 million cases of
congenital deafness in the United States, according to the National Institute on
Deafness and Other Communication Disorders.

   But Aubrey Milunsky of Boston University's School of Medicine said he
believes the disease is grossly underdiagnosed. "I've heard statistics that it's
only one in 36,000 people affected but just by looking out on the street, you
can see it's much more common than that." Key gene Extrapolating from so-called
"Splotch" mice, which share some of the same characteristics of Waardenburg's
syndrome, a research team headed by Milunsky identified last year a human gene
believed to help oversee the later stages of embryonic development. Among other
things, this gene -- called HuP2 -- is thought to control development and
distribution of melanocytes -- pigmented cells that produce skin, eye and hair
color. Melanocytes are also critical in the development of the inner ear because
they regulate the balance of potassium and sodium atoms in the fluid contained
by the cochlea, the spiral-shaped part of the inner ear.

   This fluid allows so-called hair cells inside the cochlea to send electrical
signals to the brain, which then converts the signals to sounds. But mice are
not men, obviously, and Milunsky says he would be happy to simply understand
better how the inner ear functions.

   It is an attitude of caution exhibited by Milunsky's peers, who say
repeatedly that the current sound of success is mostly just a murmur of promise.

GRAPHIC: 2 PICS; CAPTIONS: 2. Models for hearing loss: In a process called
insertional mutagenesis, UCSD scientists have isolated a mouse embryo and
injected a new gene into its nucleus. This resulted in a female mouse so
disoriented it couldn't walk straight. (E-6); PHOTOBY: 1. Union-Tribune photo
illustration / JERRY RIFE 2. Union-Tribune / BARRY FITZSIMMONS

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                             1253 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1993 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times



                       February 22, 1993, MONDAY , FINAL

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 490 words

HEADLINE: Doctors to Test Gene Therapy on Illness

BYLINE: Liz Bowie

BODY:


   Within weeks, a girl whose short life has been a struggle against a fatal
illness will receive an infusion of genetically altered cells in a painless
procedure. If the treatment works, she will be cured in a matter of months.

   The idea is radically simple: halt illness at its very core, the genetic code
that tells the body how to function. Turning that idea into reality has become
the life's work of two doctors at the National Institutes of Health in Maryland,
R. Michael Blaese and Kenneth W. Culver.

   Success in one of the world's first gene therapy experiments would help usher
in a new medicine with the potential to cure some of the world's worst scourges
- cancer, AIDS, cystic fibrosis, muscular dystrophy and hemophilia.

   The doctors are trying to cure a little-known hereditary disorder called
adenosine deaminase, or ADA, deficiency, which has threatened the girl's life
since she was born. The 6-year-old girl and an 11-year-old girl who will be
treated soon after have no ADA gene, and, therefore, their immune systems barely
function.

   Blaese is chief of the institutes' immunology branch. He has been trying to
develop a gene therapy treatment since the mid-1980s, when he worked with W.
French Anderson, a pioneer in the field. They wanted to make real what had been
imagined since the first advances in the biotechnology revolution.

   They wanted to insert genes into a human to treat an illness on the most
basic molecular level. Initial attempts would focus on a patient with a
hereditary, genetic defect. The broader goal is to manipulate a person's genes
to treat all kinds of diseases.

   They chose to work with ADA-deficient children, even though only 10 babies
are born each year in North America with the genetic disorder. The illness
seemed a reasonable first choice because it would require inserting only one
gene into the body.

   Without the ADA gene, white blood cells self-destruct, leaving the body
without its usual protection against foreign intruders. The concept was to draw
blood from a child, pick out certain cells and grow them in the laboratory. As
the cells divided, the researchers would insert the ADA gene, which is cloned
easily in the laboratory.

   Then the researchers would hook the child up to an intravenous tube and
inject millions of those cells into the child's blood. If all worked well, the
new cells with the ADA gene would begin producing an enzyme crucial to the
immune system.

   The two girls, both from Ohio, must be treated every few months with
infusions of white blood cells containing the ADA gene, to replace cells that
have died out.

   Now the doctors are pressing for a permanent cure. Within weeks, the girls
will lie down on a hospital bed for an infusion of genetically engineered stem
cells. If it works, altered stem cells will find their way to the bone marrow,
where they will remain for a lifetime reproducing white blood cells with the ADA
gene.

GRAPHIC: Baltimore Sun

LOAD-DATE: February 28, 1993


                             1254 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1993 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                 February 21, 1993, SUNDAY, THREE STAR Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3A

LENGTH: 426 words

HEADLINE: ACCESS TO GENE THERAPY OK'D; AGENCY DIRECTOR OPENS NEW DOOR FOR CANCER
PATIENTS WHO ARE DYING

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:


   Responding to pressure from a senator, the National Institutes of Health has
created a new procedure through which any dying cancer victim can seek access to
exotic - and unproven - treatments based on gene manipulations.

   Dr. Bernadine Healy, director of the institute, approved "compassionate use"
of an experimental gene therapy treatment for Clemma Hewitt, 51, of San Diego,
gravely ill with brain cancer, after Sen. Tom Harkin, D-Iowa, appealed on her
behalf.

   An institute spokesman could not say Friday whether other doctors treating
cancer victims have requested similar access to gene therapies as a result of
the decision.

   However, the spokesman confirmed that Sen. Edward Kennedy, D-Mass., has now
asked  Healy to expedite consideration of a similar request by a constituent.

   Although more than 500,000 Americans die each year of cancer, very few
victims of the disease have been included among the handful of approved
experiments involving gene therapy.

   For example, nearly 1,000 brain cancer victims have sought admission to an
experiment that will be conducted at the agency later this year. But only 20
people can be accepted for the experiment, which is not related to the case in
which Healy has allowed "compassionate use."

   Normally, scientists' use of genetic manipulations, known as recombinant DNA
techniques, must be approved by a special committee, the Recombinant DNA
Advisory Committee.

   However, after Healy's response to Harkin's entreaties, a special provision
for "emergency" action on such requests by the institute's director has been
approved by the committee.

   Harkin is chairman of the Senate subcommittee that approves money for the
institute. He contacted the director of the agency after Hewitt had been treated
with surgery, radiation and chemotherapy.

   She suffers from a uniformly fatal type of brain tumor known as a "grade 4
glioblastoma."

   Hewitt is originally from Iowa, and members of her family have been active in
Harkin's campaigns.

   Her husband, James O. Hewitt, has served in several administrations,
beginning with that of President John F. Kennedy.

   Harkin's office did not respond to questions about the matter Friday.

   Healy's approval allowed researchers to genetically alter Hewitt's own tumor
cells to give them a gene for Interleukin-2, a substance involved in the
production of white blood cells.

   The scientists hope the cancer cells will produce a type of white blood cell
that attacks the brain cancer. Similar experiments in the past have all failed.

GRAPHIC: Photo by AP Children sashaying Friday to the joyous samba beat of Rio
de Janeiro's Mardi Gras rite. The parades, in which so-called samba schools
compete, will continue through Tuesday.

LOAD-DATE: September 29, 1993


                             1255 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1993 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                   February 18, 1993, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 159 words

HEADLINE: Human genes can mutate to correct defects

BYLINE: Tim Friend

BODY:

    Scientists have found a new phenomenon in human genetics _ nature's own gene
therapy in which a defective gene mutates and becomes normal.

   The phenomenon _ reverse mutation _ was observed in two people who should
have inherited muscular dystrophy.

   Usually parents pass copies of their genes to their offspring, even if the
genes are defective.

   But in two cases cited in today's New England Journal of Medicine, fathers'
defective genes were repaired before being passed on, or soon after, sparing the
kids the disease.

   "The two subjects are examples of complete spontaneous corrections of
myotonic dystrophy mutations," writes Dr. Han Brunner, University Hospital
Nijmegen, the Netherlands.

   Myotonic dystrophy causes severe muscle weakness. It strikes one in 8,000
people, usually in early adulthood.

   Scientists had not observed reverse mutation in humans before, but say it may
occur in about 1 in 1,000 cases of myotonic dystrophy.


                             1256 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1993 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                   February 16, 1993, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; PAGE Z7

LENGTH: 1363 words

HEADLINE: Sex Stereotypes in Medicine;
Even Women at the Top of the Profession Report Harassment, Bias

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Robin Herman, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   Surgeon Kathryn D. Anderson has built more than 40 new esophoguses using
flaps from the stomach wall. Her patients are usually under 4 years old. Most of
the children were born without a gullet -- or they suffered a horrific accident
like swallowing drain cleaner. Until she got a special stapler, she used to
stitch the new passageways by hand. The operation lasts about four hours, and no
one has done more of them than Anderson. It is not a procedure for the faint of
heart.

   But when the time came for Children's National Medical Center to consider
promoting Anderson to chairman and chief of surgery, after she had spent 10
years as vice chairman, she was criticized, she says, for the very personality
qualities that she believes helped her become a successful surgeon.

   The search committee, she says, called her "aggressive," "abrasive,"
"forceful" and "strong" and went on to choose a man from outside the institution
for the job. Earlier this month, Anderson filed a lawsuit against Children's
alleging that the search committee discriminated against her in a subtle manner
called sexual stereotyping, in which a strong personality is considered
acceptable, even laudable, in a male but undesirable in a female.

   The illegality of sexual stereotyping in employment decisions was upheld by
the Supreme Court in 1989 in the case of a woman denied partnership at the
accounting firm of Price Waterhouse.

   Anderson left Children's last fall to become chief-of-surgery at Childrens
Hospital Los Angeles and is one of only three female chiefs-of-surgery in the
country.

   In Washington, Children's Hospital has denied Anderson's allegations. The
search "was totally legitimate and looked at job-related characteristics," said
Barbara B. Brown, the attorney representing Children's at Paul, Hastings,
Janofsky & Walker. "The committee selected what it believed was the best person
for the job, having nothing whatsoever to do with stereotyping or gender."

   "The center has made a very vigorous effort to recruit women," Brown said,
noting that more than 50 percent of the hospital's executive management on the
non-medical side is female, as is 20 percent of the medical department chairs.
She added that Children's has "a very strong policy against sexual harassment,
both the quid pro quo type and the hostile environment type, and they haven't
hesitated to enforce it."

   However the case of Kathryn D. Anderson v. Children's National Medical Center
turns out, the issue of sex stereotyping in medicine is gaining more attention
as health leaders try to ascertain why so few women have attained top positions
in medical schools and hospitals.

   In an editorial in the Feb. 4 New England Journal of Medicine on the barriers
to women's success in medicine, Stanford University neurosurgeon Frances Conley
expressed her belief that "the most difficult aspect of sexism to change is the
tendency to stereotype roles according to sex -- and to enforce the stereotypes
by sexual harrassment."

   In 1991, Conley resigned her position as a tenured full professor of
neurosurgery at Stanford University School of Medicine to protest the impending
appointment of a chief of neurosurgery whose choice, she said, "served to
condone and perpetuate sexism in my work environment." After Conley's story
turned national media attention to sexism in medicine, the appointment was
withdrawn and Conley decided to stay.

   Conley's editorial accompanied a study of sexual harassment during medical
training, which, she said, "reminds the medical world that not only verbal
discrimination but also more blatant forms of sexual harassment are remarkably
prevalent even in our prestigious profession."

   In the study by Miriam Komaromy and her colleagues at the University of
California, San Francisco, 73 percent of the women in the school's internal
medicine residency program, most of whom had trained at medical schools
elsewhere, reported incidents of sexual harassment. While 22 percent of male
residents also reported being harassed, Conley emphasizes that "there were
marked differences in prestige" between those harassing the men and the women.

   Women, for example, were most often the subject of offensive remarks,
touching and pressure for sexual favors from superiors who could permanently
influence their careers. Male residents in the study complained mostly about
remarks from nurses.

   Since the remarkable surge of the 1970s, women have been entering the medical
field in escalating numbers, now making up more than 38 percent of medical
students. Yet of 126 medical schools in the United States, only three are headed
by female deans, according to Janet Bickel at the Association of American
Medical Colleges. In a study following the careers of men and women who became
medical school faculty members in 1976, Bickel found that by 1987, 12 percent of
the men had become full professors but only three percent of the women had. The
shortage of female professors was noteworthy in surgical specialties.

   Conley writes that "role stereotyping has been instrumental in maintaining a
'glass ceiling' for women in medicine."

   The process is subtle and begins with the public's image of the 'heroic
manager,' she writes. "For leaders, we pick men who we think are aggressive,
tenacious, powerful and self-sufficient -- all adjectives that, when applied to
a woman of similar character, somehow mutate to become 'strident, nasty,
emasculating and stubborn,' so that those who might choose her for a leadership
position instead view her with contempt and derision," Conley writes. "Too
often, our top leaders in academic medicine, the deans and department chairs,
manage through fear and intimidation. The power of managing through mutual
respect needs to be rediscovered."

   Cardiologist Bernadine Healy, the first female director of the National
Institutes of Health, who is married to a prominent heart surgeon, put it this
way: Women face the dilemma that "the very elements that are essential to
succeed in a stereotypically macho environment are considered unpleasant in a
woman." If a woman is "gentle, sweet, compliant, soft . . . then everybody may
like her, but she doesn't have the right stuff to succeed." The solution is to
acknowledge up front that certain qualities, like toughness, decisiveness and
confidence, "are probably needed in surgery" no matter what the doctor's gender
is.

   Eleanor Smeal, president of the Feminist Majority Foundation, takes issue
with the frequent argument that because women have only entered medicine
relatively recently, it will take more time before they represent 50 percent at
top levels. "The fact is women have been in the ranks long enough that if it was
going to change gradually, it would already be occurring," she said.

   Surveys by the American Medical Association show that female physicians earn
less than two thirds of what male physicians earn.

   Some observers of the medical gender gap point to pregnancy and motherhood as
impediments for women who follow a demanding career path. But Anderson, who has
been married for 31 years to gene therapy pioneer French Anderson, has no
children.

   "In fact, I subverted my wish to have a family to have a career and I do not
regret that," said Anderson. "But it was a very conscious choice and one in
which French participated. So my ambition was to become a chairman, and I found
it very frustrating that because I was a female that was apparently going to be
denied to me."

   When the job of chairman opened up at Children's Hospital, Anderson said, she
had welcomed the search process instead of being promoted outright from her
position as acting chairman because it would demonstrate to herself and others
that she "measured up."

   "Women are so socially programmed to take secondary roles that they almost
apologize for being tops in their field," she said. "Women doubt themselves
frequently. So I felt this process would be a vindication of my own feelings and
my own qualifications."

   Anderson said she was pursuing a lawsuit against Children's "because I think
it's important for women. It's important to send a signal out that this is no
longer tolerable behavior."


GRAPHIC: PHOTO, KATHRYN D. ANDERSON

LOAD-DATE: October 14, 1993


                             1257 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1993 The Buffalo News
                            Buffalo News (New York)



                    February 12, 1993, Friday, City Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 1080 words

HEADLINE: TRIALS EXPECTED SOON FOR VACCINE TO PROTECT NEWBORNS FROM AIDS

BYLINE: By MIKE VOGEL, News Staff Reporter

DATELINE: BOSTON

BODY:

    The first clinical trials of an anti-AIDS vaccine designed to protect
newborns from the deadly disease could begin within the next few months,
scientists said here Thursday.

   The trials may point the way to saving infants infected before birth by
HIV-positive mothers.

   In reports prepared for the nation's largest annual science conference, AIDS
researchers also describe efforts to stem an expected rise in AIDS transmitted
by heterosexual contact but stopped short of predicting a vaccine to some day
eliminate the disease.

   "We simply don't know enough to predict if -- not only when -- we may have a
cure or a vaccine, said Dr. William Haseltine of Human Genome Sciences Inc."

   Despite the pessimism, researchers are zeroing in on at least one of the AIDS
problems -- infected infants. About 6,000 infected women a year give birth in
this country, said Dr. John L. Sullivan of the University of Massachusetts
Medical Center during briefings before the formal opening of the American
Association for the Advancement of Science conference. That translates into
1,500 infected infants.

   But in the Third World, he said, the problem is much greater, with 150,000
infected infants in Africa alone. "We expect that in India, South America and
Central America, it may be even greater, as the epidemic moves through these
areas," Sullivan added.

   Up to half the babies born to infected women will be infected, and another 15
percent may be infected through breast milk.

   What researchers have found, Sullivan said, is that half to three-quarters of
the babies who contract AIDS were infected not in the womb, but as they pass
through the birth canal in labor.

   That has major implications for treatment, because other diseases transmitted
that way can be cured.

   Caesarian-section deliveries to eliminate the trip through the birth canal
aren't a practical alternative because of exposure to the virus through
membranes that commonly rupture prematurely, he said.

   Three new strategies are being tested under the guidance of the AIDS Clinical
Trials Group. One involving treatment of pregnant women will start soon, another
involving tests of treatment of infants known to be infected will start next
month and the first tests of vaccines for newborns are expected in four to five
months, Sullivan said.

   The first tests will involve a vaccine of recombinant proteins. Scientist
aren't sure what vaccines, if any, may prove effective, but they are hoping for
a hepatitis-like regimen that provides immunity with a first dose at birth --
well before any infection can be detected -- followed by added doses at four and
six weeks of age.

   While scientists still don't understand the disease well enough to predict
what vaccine will work, Sullivan noted, sometimes they can develop a vaccine
that shows promise although the mechanisms aren't well understood.

   Scientists here bristled at recent reports suggesting that AIDS threatens
"marginal populations" in America.

   "We're talking about a global epidemic," Sullivan said, noting that the
number of AIDS cases has risen to 7 million in Africa, more than 1 million in
India and probably that many in South America.

   "If this were occurring because some fascist dictator somewhere was killing
these numbers of people, we would not hesitate to mount a multibillion-dollar
assault," he added.

   Dr. Max Essex of the Harvard School of Public Health said a surge in the
number of AIDS cases involving heterosexuals is likely, as well. As much as 80
to 90 percent of the disease transmission in developing countries already is
linked to heterosexual contact, he said, although the disease is still perceived
in America as a threat to homosexuals and drug abusers.

   The heterosexually transmitted strains of the HIV virus are likely to spread
from other countries such as Uganda and Thailand to the U.S., he said, and the
strains now linked to homosexual or contaminated-needle transmittal are likely
to evolve.

   The transmittal during male-female sex seems linked not only to blood but to
contact with mucous secretions, he added. Research now shows that mucous
surfaces -- saliva or cervical secretions, for example -- help carry the virus.

   "I think there is a chance, perhaps even a high chance, that we'll see more
heterosexual spread of HIV, in the near future," he said. "The virus is just now
adapting (in the U.S.) for such spread."

   Haseltine said science is exploring three main attacks on AIDS --
combinations of chemotherapy that are now in progress, tests of immunotherapy
through vaccines that are about to begin and gene therapy that may hold future
hope as researchers learn how to insert genes into humans to stimulate the
production of AIDS-fighting substances.

   "All of these procedures are going to be in place by the year 2000," he said.

   Development of a vaccine or gene therapy is critical for "any chance at all"
of halting AIDS, he noted, adding that "once the virus has established
infection, it's almost impossible for our bodies to eradicate."

LOAD-DATE: February 14, 1993


                             1258 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1993 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                   February 12, 1993, Friday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: A; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 370 words

HEADLINE: Important clues found to diseases;
Baylor researchers help identify genes

BYLINE: RUTH SoRELLE, Houston Chronicle Medical Writer; Staff

BODY:

   The genes for two immune deficiency diseases that affect boy
infants at birth have been identified by a scientific collaboration
that includes researchers at Baylor College of Medicine.

   The discoveries point the way toward new treatments for the
baffling disorders -- including substituting a normal gene for the
defective one, said Dr. John Belmont, an assistant professor at
Baylor.  His report is published in today's issue of the journal
Science.

   Boys with one form of immune deficiency called Bruton's
disease make no antibodies when they become infected with bacteria
or viruses, said Belmont, whose work is supported by the Howard
Hughes Medical Institute.

   Patients with Bruton's lack the B-cells that make
antibodies, Belmont said.  They do have T-cells, which give them
some immune protection, he said.

   Working with a group led by Dr. Owen Witte at the University
of California in Los Angeles, Belmont and his collaborator Dr. Mary
Ellen Conley of St.Jude's Children's Research Hospital in Memphis
identified a particular gene on the X-chromosome that, when
defective, causes Bruton's disease.

   ""The gene controls the growth of B-lymphocytes,'' he said.

   ""When this gene is defective, the B-lymphocytes do not grow. ''

   The second gene, when defective, results in the inability
of the children to mount a sustained immune response to fight off
infection, Belmont said.

   The disease, called hyper-IgM Syndrome, is caused by a
defect in white cells called T-lymphocytes that help the B-cells
mount their immune response in the form of antibodies.

   The B-cells make a form of immune globulin called IgM -- the
form that is most often made right after an infection is detected
by the body, Belmont said.

   However, these boys lack the T-cells needed to switch the
production by the B-cells to immune materials that are responsible
for a sustained response.

   Belmont has found that boys with this problem lack a
particular molecule made by T-cells that is necessary to
interaction with B-cells.

   It might be possible to replace this molecule in those
patients, he said.

   He is also considering the possibility of gene therapy to
replace the defective genes in both patients.


LOAD-DATE: March 3, 1993


                             1259 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                           Times Publishing Company
                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)



                     February 7, 1993, Sunday, City Edition

SECTION: NATIONAL; THE CANADA REPORT; Pg. 17A

LENGTH: 727 words

HEADLINE: Critics fear new patent law will spur drug price increase

BYLINE: JIM FOX

BODY:


   Canada is enacting a controversial drug patent law that critics say will
drive up the cost of medicine.

   The legislation extending patent protection for new prescription drugs was
passed by the Senate after earlier clearing the Commons over loud objections.

   Prime Minister Brian Mulroney said the bill, which gives protection to
multinational drug firms, is necessary to attract investment.

   The bill sparked an uproar among seniors, health-care experts and  provincial
governments. They claim it will drive up costs by billions of  dollars and
destroy the national health system.

   The medical and research communities support the bill, saying it will
generate much-needed spending on research and development.

   The legislation provides 20 years of patent protection for brand-name
pharmaceuticals, delaying the entry of lower-cost generic copies.

   Canada's Senate approved the bill the same day as U.S. senators published a
report calling for a reduction of patent terms to help bein in drug costs.



   Canadians might pay taxes on groceries and medical products if the Liberals
are elected this year.

   Liberal leader Jean Chretien was criticized in the Commons by members of  the
ruling Conservative government for suggesting he would implement a  business
transfer tax.

   The new tax would replace the much-hated Goods and Services Tax launched  two
years ago that adds 7 percent to the cost of virtually everything, except
groceries and medical products.

   Finance Minister Don Mazankowski said Chretien plans a "hidden form of
secretive, sneaky tax to replace the GST."

   Chretien said the Liberals want "an easier tax that will raise the same
amount of money but that will not be a nightmare, especially for small
businesses."

   John Bullock, president of the Canadian Federation of Business, said the  GST
costs businesses 20 cents for every dollar collected - three times what it
should.

Names in the news

   Senator Nancy Teed of New Brunswick was killed in a two-car crash on a  snowy
highway. She was 43.

   Quebec Premier Robert Bourassa is at the National Institute of Health in
Bethesda, Md. for experimental gene therapy for skin cancer. Quebec newspapers
say he soon will announce his resignation.

   Wrestler Andre "The Giant" Roussimoff, 46, who ran a Montreal restaurant  in
the 1970s, has died of a heart attack. He was 7 foot4 and 520 pounds.

Facts and figures

   The Bank of Canada has lowered its key interest rate to 6.63 percent from
6.81.

   The Canadian dollar was worth 79.27 U.S. cents Friday, while a U.S. dollar
returned $ 1.2615 Canadian.

   Stock markets were higher; Toronto's composite index was 3,377 points
Friday.

   Lotto 6-49: (Wednesday) 1, 24, 28, 34, 44 and 47; bonus 43. (Jan. 30) 1, 6,
13, 14, 19 and 34; bonus 8.   In brief

   Mulroney called on President Clinton on Friday, the first foreign leader  to
stop by the White House since the election. The neighboring leaders  discussed
moving ahead with the North American Free Trade Agreement and other  world
issues. Clinton joked that Americans want the World Series pennant back  from
the Toronto Blue Jays.

   In Ontario, Premier Bob Rae cut the size of his cabinet by eight and  removed
five deputy ministers. Several ministries or departments were  combined.

   Toronto janitor John Carlos Terceira, 20, was found guilty of murdering  and
raping Andrea Atkinson, 6, and sentenced to life in prison without parole  for
25 years.

   Sears Canada lost $ 90.9-million (Canadian) last year, its worst loss in 40
years of business in Canada. The company expects "significant improvement"  this
year, says president Joseph Reddington. Also in business, General Motors  Canada
president George Peapples says there are no assurances layoffs are  over. GM is
cutting 7,100 jobs at Ontario plants.



   Residents of the affluent Toronto neighborhoods of Forest Hill and Rosedale
may soon have to haul out their own trash.

   The city council might end the practice of having garbage collectors
retrieve the trash from rear and side yards and return the empty cans. The
service is provided only in the higher-taxed neighborhoods. Scrapping the
service will save $ 400,000 (Canadian) a year, but will reduce Toronto life to
the "lowest common denominator," said opposing council member Michael  Walker.

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 1993


                             1260 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1993 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                    February 5, 1993, Friday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; PAGE F3; MICHAEL SCHRAGE

LENGTH: 848 words

HEADLINE: Biomedical Breakthroughs, Designer Genes and the Mouse That Soared

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Michael Schrage

BODY:

   The HLA-B27 is one sorry rat. Bred -- or built -- by the DNA designers at
GenPharm International Inc., the recombinant rodent is genetically altered to
suffer the afflictions of arthritis, psoriasis and inflammatory bowel disease.
You can take him home for $ 285.

   If your taste runs to precancerous mice, consider GenPharm's bestselling
TSG-p53 "knockout" mouse for $ 155 -- a creature with its p53 gene (the one
implicated in many cancers) effectively "knocked out" of its genome.

   Not good enough? "We do 'custom-tailor' mice," notes Howard B. Rosen,
GenPharm's corporate development director. "We view them as the canvas upon
which we do these genetic transplantations."

   In fact, these genomic canvases are fast becoming the new mass medium for
biomedical innovation. Much as sculptors carve stone and cinematographers light
film, molecular biologists now struggle to genetically manipulate their mammals
into research masterpieces. Where Gregor Mendel had his pea patch, Thomas Hunt
Morgan bred drosophilae (fruit flies) and an entire era of budding molecular
biologists was raised twiddling E. coli bacteria, it's clear that the next
generation of experimental media is now scurrying in.

   From the California Institute of Technology to the Pasteur Institute to the
National Institutes of Health, these four-legged "biomedia" will ultimately
determine which human diseases get cured and when. The better engineered the
mammal, the better -- and, possibly, more cost-effective -- the medical options
for humans.

   Consequently, this transition will have as big an impact on the future of
biology as the shift from printing presses to video technology has had on pop
culture. A mouse-based world looks and feels different from one viewed through
microorganisms.

   "Right now, if one wants to understand human disease processes, a knock-out
mouse will probably give you more bang for the buck than E. coli," says Michael
Lenardo, a senior investigator at the NIH's National Institute for Allergies and
Infectious Diseases. "There's no question that an enormous amount of money and
effort is going to be spent on them -- to some extent at the expense of E. coli"
-- the species of bacteria in humans and all vertebrates that is widely used in
biological research.

   "There's certainly been an explosion in transgenic mouse models of disease,"
says Caltech science historian Daniel Kevles, who recently coauthored a book on
gene mapping. "Research funding patterns may be such that it's encouraging
people to move into it -- but that doesn't mean E. coli or drosophila is a dead
field."

   But cancers occur in living animals, not single-cell organisms. So while just
three years ago knockout mice were involved in only 5 percent of the experiments
in Lenardo's lab, more than a quarter of his research efforts now involve mice.
Within three years, he expects that genetically tailored mice will used in the
majority of his lab research.

   Indeed, in terms of pure usefulness, mapping the mouse genome now rivals
mapping the human genome. Just as E. coli became the gateway to genetic
engineering, the mammals will become our models for understanding gene
therapies. For all intents and purposes, mice are becoming the E. coli and
drosophila of the 1990s.

   "In general, if you look at the history of biomedical research, certain media
have become prominent," says Lenardo. "I think one of the most interesting and
important things about American science is its diversity of media. For example,
[Nobel laureate] Barbara McClintock did her work out of the genetics mainstream
using maize as her research organism."

   While standards aren't inevitable, Lenardo and other researchers acknowledge
that certain organisms come to dominate a field. The properties -- and
constraints -- of these media explicitly shape the kind of science that gets
done.

   For example, most neurophysiologists avoid using mice as research media
because mouse brains are inconveniently small. But suppose that knockout mice
and transgenic mice end up with their brains redesigned in unexpected ways? You
can be sure that mice would quickly become essential to the new genetics of
neurophysiology.

   "I think what we will see is a proliferation of models," says Caltech's
Kevles. Indeed, knockout pigs are growing in popularity because of their
potential for human organ transplants. Maybe we will see knockout/transgenic
baboons bred for similar purposes. Now that the ban on fetal tissue transplant
research has been lifted, we can expect researchers to start excising and
modifying bits of the human genome as a research tool.

   "In the early days," says NIH's Lenardo, "we researched how molecules relate
to each other; now we can study how molecules make cells relate to each other."

   Even with television, camcorders and computers, we still read and write with
paper. Similarly, traditional biomedical media won't go away just because the
mammals are coming. But the fact that we are mammals makes that new reality that
much more compelling.


   Michael Schrage is a columnist for the Los Angeles Times.

LOAD-DATE: October 14, 1993


                             1261 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1993 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                    February 4, 1993, Thursday, Home Edition

SECTION: Business; Part D; Page 1; Column 4; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 832 words

HEADLINE: INNOVATION / MICHAEL SCHRAGE:  TODAY, RODENTS WITH PSORIASIS;
TOMORROW, SUPER-BRAINY MICE!

BYLINE: By MICHAEL SCHRAGE

BODY:

   The HLA-B27 is one sorry rat. Bred -- or built -- by the DNA designers at
GenPharm International, the recombinant rodent is genetically altered to suffer
the afflictions of arthritis, psoriasis and inflammatory bowel disease. You can
take him home for $285.

   If your taste runs to precancerous mice, consider GenPharm's best-selling
TSG-p53 "knockout" mouse for $155 -- a creature with its p53 gene (the one
implicated in many cancers) effectively "knocked out" of its genome.

   Not good enough? "We do 'custom-tailor' mice," notes GenPharm corporate
development director Howard B. Rosen. "We view them as the canvas upon which we
do these genetic transplantations."

   In fact, these genomic canvases are fast becoming the new mass medium for
biomedical innovation. Much as sculptors carve stone and cinematographers light
film, molecular biologists now struggle to genetically manipulate their mammals
into research masterpieces. Where Gregor Mendel had his pea patch, Caltech's
Thomas Hunt Morgan bred drosophilae (fruit flies) and an entire era of budding
molecular biologists was raised twiddling E. coli bacteria, it's clear that the
next generation of experimental media is now scurrying in.

   From Caltech to the Pasteur Institute to the National Institutes of Health,
these four-legged "biomedia" will ultimately determine which human diseases get
cured and when. The better-engineered the mammal, the better -- and, possibly,
more cost-effective -- the medical options for humans.

   Consequently, this transition will have as big an impact on the future of
biology as the shift from printing presses to video technology has had on pop
culture. A mouse-based world looks and feels different from one viewed through
microorganisms.

   "Right now, if one wants to understand human disease processes, a knock-out
mouse will probably give you more bang for the buck than E. coli," says Dr.
Michael Lenardo, a senior investigator at the NIH's National Institute for
Allergies and Infectious Diseases. "There's no question that an enormous amount
of money and effort is going to be spent on them -- to some extent at the
expense of E. coli" -- the species of bacteria in humans and all vertebrates
that is widely used in biological research.

   "There's certainly been an explosion in transgenic mouse models of disease,"
says Caltech science historian Daniel Kevles, who recently co-authored a book on
gene mapping. "Research funding patterns may be such that it's encouraging
people to move into it -- but that doesn't mean E. coli or drosophila is a dead
field."

   But cancers occur in living animals, not single-cell organisms. So while just
three years ago knockout mice were involved in only 5% of the experiments in
Lenardo's lab, more than a quarter of his research efforts now involve mice.
Within three years, he expects that genetically-tailored mice will used in the
majority of his lab research.

   Indeed, in terms of pure usefulness, mapping the mouse genome now rivals
mapping the human genome in terms of importance. Just as E. coli became the
gateway to genetic engineering, the mammals will become our models for
understanding gene therapies. For all intents and purposes, mice are becoming
the E. coli and drosophila of the 1990s.

   "In general, if you look at the history of biomedical research, certain media
have become prominent," says NIH's Lenardo. "I think one of the most interesting
and important things about American science is its diversity of media. For
example, (Nobel laureate) Barbara McClintock did her work out of the genetics
mainstream using maize as her research organism."

   While standards aren't inevitable, Lenardo and other researchers acknowledge
that certain organisms come to dominate a field. The properties -- and
constraints -- of these media explicitly shape the kind of science that gets
done.

   For example, most neurophysiologists avoid using mice as research media
because mouse brains are inconveniently small. But suppose that knockout mice
and transgenic mice end up with their brains redesigned in unexpected ways? You
can be sure that mice would quickly become essential to the new genetics of
neurophysiology.

   "I think what we will see is a proliferation of models," says Caltech's
Kevles. Indeed, knockout pigs are growing in popularity. Maybe we will see
knockout/transgenic baboons bred for similar purposes. Now that the ban on fetal
tissue transplant research has been lifted, we can expect researchers to start
excising and modifying bits of the human genome as a research tool.

   "In the early days," says NIH's Lenardo, "we researched how molecules relate
to each other; now we can study how molecules make cells relate to each other."

   Even with television, camcorders and computers, we still read and write with
paper. Similarly, traditional biomedical media won't go away just because the
mammals are coming. But the fact that we are mammals makes that new reality that
much more compelling.


                             1262 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1993 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                    February 2, 1993, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; PAGE Z7

LENGTH: 1486 words

HEADLINE: Answering a Brain Cancer Patient's Plea;
NIH Grants First Emergency Compassionate Use of an Unapproved Gene Therapy

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Robin Herman, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   When federal researchers announced last summer that they were going to try
gene therapy on patients in the terminal stages of brain cancer, calls and
letters began to stream in to the National Institutes of Health. More than 650
requests have been received for an experiment planned for 20 patients.

   "There were calls from Capitol Hill, from all around the country and around
the world," said Kenneth Culver, who with Edward Oldfield and Michael Blaese
designed the experimental treatment. Husbands pleaded for their ailing wives.
Grandparents sent photos of their doomed grandchildren. Family members pressed
NIH researchers to accept their loved one into the clinical trial -- or, if not,
to grant a "compassionate exemption" to try the treatment outside of the
research group, even before the usefulness of injecting genetically altered
cells into the brain has been proven.

   Until a month ago, the NIH had not allowed anyone outside of those in
limited, approved clinical trials like Culver's to get gene therapy.

   But now a patient not in a formal clinical trial has been granted a chance to
try an unapproved version of the therapy. The 51-year-old San Diego woman, in
the end stages of the virulent brain cancer called glioblastoma, has gained
permission on compassionate grounds from NIH director Bernadine Healy to receive
an untested, and unapproved, gene therapy treatment that is, by all accounts,
unlikely to work. The procedure, in which brain tumor cells are removed,
genetically altered and reinjected into the patient's arm, was devised by
scientists outside NIH who say it would be "amazing" if there were any effect on
their first patient.

   Last week, the woman received a second injection of her own tumor cells,
which theoretically could stimulate her immune system to fight the brain cancer
but has never been shown to do so in animals or humans.

   "This patient has no alternative hope," said Ivor Royston, director of the
San Diego Regional Cancer Center, who is performing the gene therapy. "We have
taken an oath as a doctor to give the patient the best treatment. If a patient
is dying of brain cancer, experimental therapy may be the best therapy
available."

   Healy granted the first emergency request on behalf of the San Diego patient
only after an intense lobbying campaign by the woman's husband and a genetic
researcher eager to join the new field of gene therapy. But when Healy approved
the request without waiting for a formal ruling from her gene therapy advisory
committee, a controversy over motives and methods erupted.

   That patients are demanding compassionate use of gene therapy signals the
evolution of the experimental field, which began just 2 1/2 years ago and has
yet to cure a single patient. Altering a person's genetic material was initially
considered so radical and potentially dangerous, so fraught with ethical
questions, that an NIH Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee, or RAC, was created
to review all uses of gene therapy. The first experiments were on people with
rare hereditary disorders.  With the move into experiments on brain cancer,
which kills 12,000 Americans a year, a new constituency and intense interest
have emerged.

   "Once the [brain] tumor recurs, it's a matter of weeks to a few months,"
Culver said, "so it's a group desperately looking for a therapy that might be
helpful."

   In light of Healy's decision, patients who were initially rejected from the
NIH group's limited gene therapy experiment because of the size, type or
placement of their tumors are asking why they too cannot get an exemption and
grasp this last straw of hope.

   Researchers say there is a crucial, practical difference between allowing
compassionate use of unapproved drugs, as the Food and Drug Administration does,
and allowing unapproved gene therapy. An AIDS patient, for example, may be
allowed to take an experimental drug under a private physician's supervision.
But "a person can't go out and [get] gene therapy just because we say it's
okay," said Johanna Schneider, spokeswoman for Healy.

   "We can only treat a tiny fraction of the patients who come to us," said the
National Cancer Institute's Steven A. Rosenberg, who uses gene therapy on
patients with malignant melanoma, a lethal skin cancer. "Given the complexity of
the treatment, we can only treat one patient every two weeks. And we get
sometimes five or 10 calls a day. It's not the approval process that is slowing
us down, but the complexity of the science and technology."

   But Rosenberg said there is a need for compassionate exemptions "in special
circumstances," even for gene therapy.

   When Healy granted the San Diego woman this first "compassionate use" of gene
therapy a month ago, it prompted an outcry from the RAC, a panel of scientists,
lawyers and ethicists. The RAC had resisted reviewing the request because it
felt it had authority only over formal research proposals. Royston was proposing
emergency treatment of a single patient. In 1991, Royston had submitted a
different gene therapy proposal that had been rejected by the RAC on scientific
grounds.

   Some panel members believed Healy bypassed the RAC to grant a compassionate
exemption for political reasons; the San Diego woman's case had been brought to
Healy's attention last October by Sen. Tom Harkin (D-Iowa), chairman of the
Senate appropriations subcommittee in charge of NIH's budget. The patient's
husband had contacted Harkin through a friend.

   Harkin had asked that the RAC consider individual compassionate-plea requests
until legislation could create "a clear authority and mechanism for handling
these cases" such as already exists at the FDA for unapproved drugs.

   Initially, Healy had turned aside the request, writing to Harkin, "There is
much more known about drugs as therapy than there is known about gene therapy .
. . . It is not possible to make decisions as to which case is more worthy than
others when one is dealing with what are uniformly fatal diseases."

   But the patient's husband, an economist and lawyer who said he has served on
several federal advisory committees, kept pressing the FDA and the NIH. By his
own count, he contacted 31 major cancer research centers in the United States,
Europe and Japan.

   "I became a pest, I suppose," said the husband, who asked for anonymity to
protect his wife's privacy. "I was persistent because I learned to talk their
language. The door has been opened, and I think we'll see more people coming
forward."

   His wife received experimental treatment with monoclonal antibodies at Duke
University and twice has had brain surgery, including removal of the entire
right temporal lobe. Radiotherapy, chemotherapy and surgery have all failed.

   Royston and the husband gained an FDA compassionate plea review that found
the proposed tumor cell injection was at the least not harmful. Healy, presented
with that approval and background material submitted to FDA, plus word that the
woman was not expected to live much longer, was persuaded to act before the RAC
would have time to review a formal proposal.

   Since Healy's decision, Sen. Edward Kennedy (D-Mass.) has made a request for
compassionate use of gene therapy on behalf of a constituent with terminal brain
cancer. Healy has written to him that the case would get an expedited review to
see if the patient met the criteria for the NIH's clinical trial.

   Some gene therapy researchers are uncomfortable with the compassionate plea
concept, since all of their patients are by definition near death. Trying to
treat "all comers," said Blaese, would keep scientists from the very research
that will determine whether gene therapy can ever help anybody.

   But the pressure to treat people with nowhere else to turn is relentless.
"One gentleman from Europe has been calling me every month to see if we could do
something for his child who has a brain tumor," said Culver. "If we knew this
therapy was going to be useful, it'd make all the difference in the world. But
we don't, so we can't give out false hope."

   At an emergency meeting on Jan. 14, the RAC came up with guidelines for the
NIH director to follow in making a quick "emergency" review of compassionate use
requests. The guidelines were intended to make sure a researcher does not use
the compassionate exemption to get around rigorous scientific and ethical review
of the experiment. "Our hope is by spring to try to have an airtight, nailed
down and publishable policy," said Healy's spokeswoman Schneider.

   "Gene therapy is progressing rapidly," said Nancy Buc, a former FDA counsel
who is a member of the RAC panel and helped draw up the temporary guidelines.
"More investigators are in a position to try it, and more patients know about
it. In a sense, this is what we should all be hoping for -- the technology is
advancing, it's being disseminated more widely and there are more patients that
perhaps can benefit."



GRAPHIC: PHOTO, IVOR ROYSTON AT SAN DIEGO REGIONAL CANCER CENTER RECEIVED
PERMISSION TO PERFORM THE UNAPPROVED GENE THERAPY ON A SINGLE BRAIN CANCER
PATIENT. ROBERT BURROUGHS FOR TWP

LOAD-DATE: October 14, 1993


                             1263 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1993 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe



                     February 1, 1993, Monday, City Edition

SECTION: SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY; Pg. 27

LENGTH: 1350 words

HEADLINE: THE GENOME PROJECT;
A 'superstar' takes over the helm;
Renowned gene hunter call perfect fit for the job

BYLINE: By Richard Saltus, Globe Staff

BODY:

    Dr. Francis Collins made a splash in 1989, when he and another geneticist
found the long-sought gene that causes cystic fibrosis, the most common of
deadly inherited diseases.

   Only a year later, he was co-discoverer of another key gene, the cause of
neurofibromatosis. Now, he's pursuing the elusive gene for Huntington's disease,
and another that makes some families highly susceptible to breast cancer.

   With his ingenious methods of sifting DNA, Collins has become a celebrated
gene-hunter. In the words of geneticist Norton Zinder of Rockefeller University,
he's a "superstar of the genome business."

   So when James Watson retired last year as head of the Human Genome Project,
the 42-year-old Collins, chief of Medical Genetics at the University of Michigan
since 1987, was everyone's choice to succeed him.

   But Collins agonized over the job. He was concerned that administering the
immense, worldwide effort to decipher all the human genes would sidetrack his
own research.

   Dr. Bernadine Healy, director of the National Institutes of Health,
negotiated with Collins for months, finally luring him with the promise of a big
lab of his own, as well as a new National Institute of Genetics, at the NIH
headquarters in Bethesda, Md.

   "I think she's found the the best person on the planet" to lead the project,
says Robert Cook-Deegan, a policy expert with the Institute of Medicine of the
National Academy of Sciences and author of a forthcoming book on the genome
project. "He's politically savvy, he's smooth, he knows the science, and he's
got terrific credibilty in the scientific community."

   Healy told Science magazine that it was "probably the biggest recruitment
that NIH ever made, in stature and resource commitment."

   Colleagues call him one of the world's nicest guys, a congenial collaborator
in a field laced with rivalry and large egos, and an unfailingly polite,
down-to-earth individual who has given a human face to the high-tech field of
gene discovery.

    Collins, who says he "became a Christian" a dozen years ago, professes an
uneasiness with abortion. The stance seems something of a paradox, because when
scientists uncover the genetic causes of disease, it often leads to prenatal
tests giving parents the option of aborting an affected fetus.

   "We've had some discussions about that," says Rockefeller's Zinder, referring
to other top genome scientists. Yet Collins' religion has not become a public
issue.

   Collins says his newfound faith inspired him to interrupt his work for a
three-week stint in a small Nigerian hospital, distant in every way from his
normal high-tech world.

   "There was very little in the way of laboratory services," Collins was quoted
as saying in a University of Michigan publication. "Mostly, you had to just go
by your eyes and your head and your hands and your heart."

   Both his technical powers and his humanistic side will be tested by the scope
of the genome project. Launched about 30 months ago, the genome mission is the
most ambitious and costly biology project of all time, a $ 3 billion, 15-year
attempt to catalogue and translate the human genetic blueprint.

   The genome project, though administered from Bethesda, is carried out by
scientists across the United States and in many other countries. They submit
their findings - landmarks on the map, gene locations and sequences of genetic
code - to a central data bank. So far, the US government has funded nine major
genome research centers, including one at the Whitehead Institute in Cambridge.

   The target of the genome project is the estimated 50,000 to 100,000 genes in
each cell (genes are the same in all cells, though different genes function in
different types of cells). A gene's message may contain 50 million to 250
million chemical "letters" arranged in a specific order, or sequence.
Altogether, the roughly 3 billion chemical letters spell out the entire set of
instructions for building a human. And those instructions are passed on to
succeeding generations.

   Sequencing the genes, in order to read their messages, will take such
numbingly repetitive and tedious work that only when robots can do most of the
work cheaply will that phase begin.

   "That will be one of Francis' hardest decisions - deciding when the
technology is good and cheap enough to begin sequencing," said Helen
Donis-Keller, a leading genome mapper at Washington University in St. Louis.

   That task will indeed be huge.

   If all the DNA (the molecule that makes up genes) in a typical human cell
were unraveled and stretched out flat, it would make a thin ribbon about six
feet long. As of now, scientists have sequenced less than half an inch of this
ribbon.

   In his first public talk, the new genome chief told doctors at Brigham and
Women's Hospital recently that the project will open a "new paradigm" of
medicine, one that emphasizes prevention of major diseases.

   Uncovering the secrets of heredity could enormously benefit basic biology and
medicine, say genome researchers, but that same information poses dangers for
society.

   Issues of privacy, discrimination, eugenics, possibly even changes in how
humans view themselves, surround the genome project. Quoting surveys in which
some people favored genetic testing and abortion to prevent the birth of a child
prone to obesity, Collins asked, "Are we going to end up with some sort of
homemade eugenics?"

   However, noting that 5 percent of the genome's budget supports research on
the ethical, legal and social questions, he said, "this is the first technology
that's ever been developed in concert with research" into its impact on society.

   The gene-hunter has faced such dilemmas at close range in his own research.
His discovery of the cystic fibrosis gene along with geneticist Lap-Chee Tsui
meant that physicians could screen everybody of reproductive age, so that
healthy couples would know if both harbored the recessive gene. If so, a child
they conceived might develop the lethal disease.

   The CF gene discovery inevitably prompted debate about the advisability of
widespread testing, and at what point - if ever - doctors should begin offering
it. The NIH is now monitoring pilot studies of cystic fibrosis testing.

   Collins also has been studying rare families in which women who inherit a
certain mutant gene are at 85 percent risk of developing breast cancer.

   What began as a research effort turned into something "quite intense and
emotional," Collins said in his Boston talk. Some women in such families had
been undergoing elective double mastectomies in an effort to prevent the
disease. At least one had had the operation unnecessarily, the genetic test
showed, because she didn't carry the mutation.

   Those who choose the test may learn early in life that they are at terrible
risk. While it gives them options, "they are not pretty ones," says Collins, and
the knowledge may create more fear than the uncertainty.

   Such dilemmas are becoming more frequent in the new age of "genetic
clairvoyance," says psychologist Nancy Wexler, head of the ethical, legal and
social implications arm of the genome project.

   Collins adds that if the breast cancer gene proves to have a role in more
common types of inherited breast cancer susceptibility, pressures for testing
may become widespread. "I'm concerned that we're not going to be prepared to
handle the demand for genetic tests and the thorny questions" that will ensue,
he said.

   Genome scientists say Collins, with his training as a medical doctor in
addition to molecular biology, represents the future of genetic research.

    "He's one of a new breed of physician-scientists," said Gary Nabel, a gene
therapy specialist at the University of Michigan. "Very rapidly, basic work in
the laboratory is being translated into clinical medicine, and that's what makes
someone like Francis a more effective leader."

   In the end, it was the challenge of putting his stamp on such an
unprecedented exploration of humanity that convinced Collins he should take the
job.

   "In a way," he said, "I feel as if I have been preparing for this my whole
life."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, GLOBE STAFF PHOTO/WENDY MAEDA / DR. FRANCIS COLLINS / He faces
some hard decisions

LOAD-DATE: February 3, 1993


                             1264 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1993 The Buffalo News
                            Buffalo News (New York)



                    January 31, 1993, Sunday, Final Edition

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 1000 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY ON HORIZON FOR CARDIAC CARE

BYLINE: Chicago Tribune  Baltimore Sun  Dallas Morning News  Newsday

BODY:

    A few years from now, when physicians open a patient's clogged coronary
arteries, they may also infuse tissue cells with genes to keep arteries open and
promote new vessel growth.

   The genetic therapy could be delivered as part of the same catheter procedure
that inserts a balloon into a diseased artery and inflates it to open the
pathway for blood. Today, when physicians use the balloon treatment, called
angioplasty, arteries will reclose, on average, more than 40 percent of the
time.

   By inserting genetic materials to change instructions given heart tissue
cells, it may be possible to avoid this reclosure much of the time, something
cardiologists long for.

   Experiments in animals suggest that scientists have found how to deliver the
materials needed to alter genetic instructions to achieve just such results.
Tests in humans could begin within two years.

   Dr. Jeffrey M. Leiden, University of Chicago cardiology chief, lectured to a
few thousand colleagues from around the world attending the recent American
Heart Association meeting in New Orleans on the fantastic promise of gene
therapy for cardiac care.

   Search for old air fails


   BALTIMORE -- There was no 300-year-old air trapped inside St. Mary's City's
lead coffins after all.

   "I think it's modern air," said Joel Levine, the atmospheric scientist who
led the air analysis by scientists at NASA's Langley Research Center in Hampton,
Va.

   The coffins, buried beneath the floor of the 17th century Great Brick Chapel,
contained the remains of two adults and a baby thought to have been members of
Maryland's founding Calvert family. Scientists had also hoped to find pristine,
Colonial-era air trapped inside.

   "We have done extensive analyses in the laboratory of the samples we took,
and at this point we have unambiguously detected chlorofluorocarbons," Levine
said.

   Chlorofluorocarbons, or CFCs, are modern, man-made compounds. Because they
have dispersed throughout the environment since they were first manufactured in
the 1940s, they were chosen by the NASA researchers as the chemical "red flag"
that would signal the presence of modern air inside the coffins.

   Scientists had hoped to compare the chemistry of "old" air from the coffins
with that of modern air in order to measure how much the atmosphere has been
altered by industrial pollution and the burning of fossil fuels since the
Industrial Revolution.

   False alarm on quake


   While most of the world cheered the arrival of 1993, many of the world's top
earthquake experts greeted the new year with a grimace.

   Because the only long-term earthquake prediction ever sanctioned by the
scientific community proved to be a false alarm.

   For seven years the U.S. Geological Survey has waited -- instruments at the
ready -- astride the San Andreas fault in the tiny town of Parkfield, Calif.  In
1985, the Survey predicted that a magnitude 6 earthquake would strike the town
before 1993.

   But it's 1993 now, and still no earthquake. The Parkfield scientists are
wondering what went wrong.

   Gene bank for India medicines


   NEW DELHI, India (Reuters) -- What India's villagers and Sanskrit scholars
have known for centuries -- that the bark of the babbula tree is good for
tonsilitis, and the nagakesara flower works wonders on hemorrhoids -- is now
being scrutinized by environmental scientists.

   The babbula and the nagakesara are among thousands of India's medicinal and
aromatic plants and trees that form the base of the country's ancient Ayurvedic
system of medicine.

   The tissue of these plants will soon be stored in liquid nitrogen in a gene
bank, a landmark cooperative project among developing countries to save their
eroding genetic resources.

   India has been assigned to develop gene banks for Asia by the Group of 15
(G-15) developing countries. Egypt will coordinate banks for the African
countries and Brazil for Latin America.

   Infrared detection of land mines


   By using sensitive infrared instruments staring down from a hovering
helicopter, researchers at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory in California
can see tiny differences in soil temperature that show where the lethal leftover
seeds of modern warfare, land mines, lie buried.

LOAD-DATE: February 2, 1993


                             1265 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1993 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                    January 30, 1993, Saturday, Home Edition

SECTION: Metro; Part B; Page 1; Column 2; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 774 words

HEADLINE: PART OF PARENTS' LUNGS IMPLANTED IN WOMAN;
MEDICINE: IT IS THE FIRST TIME THAT LIVING DONORS HAVE BEEN USED TO TREAT A
CYSTIC FIBROSIS PATIENT. THE PROCEDURE MAY HELP ALLEVIATE A SHORTAGE OF ORGANS.

BYLINE: By THOMAS H. MAUGH II, TIMES SCIENCE WRITER

BODY:

   In a unique operation, USC surgeons on Friday transplanted lung segments from
a mother and father into their 22-year-old daughter, whose lungs had failed as
the result of scarring from cystic fibrosis.

   The operation is the first time a living donor has been used to treat a
cystic fibrosis patient, according to Dr. Vaughn A. Starnes, who performed the
operation at University Hospital. It is also the first in which two donors have
been used in a lung transplant.

   Friday's operation was also unusual in that Starnes -- long a pioneer in lung
transplants -- took only one of five lung lobes from each parent. He
transplanted the lower left lobe from 55-year-old James Sewell and the lower
right lobe from 49-year-old Barbara Sewell into their daughter Stacy. The left
human lung has two lobes; the right has three.

   The new procedure "could have a very important long-term impact because of
the shortage of organ donors," Starnes said in a news conference Friday.

   All three family members were listed in critical condition -- the usual
condition after transplant surgery -- after the five-hour procedure performed in
three operating rooms, but they are "doing very well," Starnes said.

   Lung transplants from cadavers have become common, but not routine, for
cystic fibrosis patients, said Dr. Robert Dresing, president of the Cystic
Fibrosis Foundation. "But I've never heard of both parents doing it," he said.
"This is certainly a first."

   Dresing noted that the success rate and the survival rate for single lung
transplants is very high. Lung transplants "are a wonderful procedure, but they
are certainly not a panacea."

   According to hospital officials, there have been more than 1,400 operations
in which one or both lungs have been transplanted from cadavers, but only six
prior transplants of single lobes, three of them performed by Starnes. One lobe
was enough in those cases because all were infants suffering from congenital
malformations. Two of the three patients treated by Starnes are alive.

   One lobe would not provide adequate lung capacity for an adult, however, said
Dr. Bruce Reitz, a transplant surgeon at Stanford University Medical Center. But
it would not be acceptable to take more than one lobe from a living donor
either.

   "One doesn't want to take too much of the pulmonary reserve away from a
person who is healthy," Reitz said. So using two donors, he added, is
"appropriate" and is probably the best choice.

   Stacy Sewall had been very ill and in and out of hospitals for most of the
past year, Starnes said. "Every breath was a struggle for this young woman," he
added.

   She had been on a waiting list to receive whole lungs from cadavers but was
not at the top of the list and recently took a turn for the worse, according to
Dr. Richard Barbers, a USC internist and medical transplant director. Starnes
said she had only a week to live and that the high-risk transplant was the only
chance for an extension of her life.

   Starnes and his colleagues began the operation on the three family members --
all from Quartz Hill, near Lancaster -- about 7:30 a.m. Friday and finished at
12:30 p.m. Her diseased lungs were removed and replaced with the parents' two
lobes.

   Stacy Sewell is a "petite person," weighing about 95 pounds, and the
operation gave her more lung capacity than she had before, Barbers said. The
parents have enough reserve lung capacity that "they will not miss the lobes,"
he said. "We're putting the parents at minimal risk."

   Cystic fibrosis affects about 30,000 Americans. Its primary effect is the
accumulation of mucus in the lungs that makes breathing difficult and promotes
life-threatening bacterial infections. Although CF victims once died in their
teens, new treatment methods that clear mucus and reduce infections routinely
extend their lives into their 30s and 40s.

   Three groups of physicians in the United States have been given permission to
begin tests of gene therapy on CF patients, but that approach is of little
benefit to victims like Stacy Sewell, whose lungs have already been badly
scarred. In such patients, lung transplants -- first performed only seven years
ago -- are now the treatment of last resort.

   One-year survival rates for lung transplant patients vary from about 50% to
75%, depending on the institution. Starnes' one-year survival rate is nearly
80%, said Lisa Leonard, cardiothoracic transplant program coordinator at USC.

   If all goes well, Starnes said, the parents would be released from the
hospital in five to six days and Stacy in three weeks, hospital officials said.

   Times staff writer Douglas P. Shuit contributed to this story.

GRAPHIC: Photo, James and Barbara Sewell pictured with their daughter, Stacy.


                             1266 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1993 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            January 29, 1993 Friday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-8:4,5,6; B-5:2

LENGTH: 360 words

HEADLINE: Woman gets 2nd dose of new gene therapy

BYLINE: DAVID GRAHAM, Staff Writer

BODY:

   A San Diego woman has received a second injection of genetically altered
cells to treat her brain tumor, and doctors cautioned that it will likely be
several weeks before any result is evident. The condition of the 51-year-old
woman remains stable, and the tumor that threatens her life apparently has not
grown or receded, Dr. Robert Sobol, of the San Diego Regional Cancer Center,
said yesterday. A nurse gave the woman an injection Wednesday of 10 million
genetically altered cells -- about half a teaspoonful -- that doctors hope will
boost her immune response to the tumor.

   The injection was administered at Sharp Memorial Hospital, and the woman was
monitored through the afternoon before being released. The woman's situation
gained national attention earlier this month as she became the first person to
be treated with an unproven gene therapy because conventional medicines had
failed to cure her.

   Citing compassion, government regulators granted researchers an exemption so
the woman could receive the treatment. Her husband has asked that the family not
be identified to preserve their privacy. Sobol said a third dose, administered
sometime in mid-February, likely will be required before the treatment shows any
results. "It takes awhile for the immune response to be boosted," Sobol said.
The cells have been altered to contain a gene to produce interleukin-2, a
protein that Sobol and colleague Dr. Ivor Royston believe they can use to
stimulate the activity of naturally occurring killer T-cells, which are capable
of attacking and destroying cancer cells. Sometime after the third dose, the
doctors will mix a sample of the woman's blood with a sample of her own tumor
cells.

   If the tumor cells are attacked, it would suggest the therapy is stimulating
an immune response, Sobol said.

   The cancerous cells had been removed from her brain during an earlier surgery
to remove the tumor, and they are preserved and grown by Sobol's colleague Habib
Fakhrai for use in the tests. The doses are planned to be progressively larger
to determine the most effective amounts to give, Sobol said, adding, "It's
somewhat unknown what the optimal dose will be."

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                             1267 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1993 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                    January 29, 1993, Friday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; PAGE F2; DIGEST

LENGTH: 1046 words

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: From news services and staff reports

BODY:

   ECONOMY

   New claims for jobless benefits

   increased in mid-January for a third straight week, the government reported.
The Labor Department said first-time applications for unemployment insurance
rose by 2,000, to 364,000, during the week ended Jan. 16. That was the highest
level since they totaled 374,000 during the week ended Nov. 14.

   COMPANIES

   Alliant Techsystems,

   a maker of ammunition and weapons, plans to eliminate 1,700 jobs over the
next 14 months, mostly in the Twin Cities area, following a $ 90.5 million
third-quarter loss.

   Genetic Therapy's

   offering of 1.5 million common shares was priced at $ 10 each through
underwriters led by Smith Barney. The Gaithersburg-based firm expects to use
proceeds for research and development and capital expenses.

   Marriott

   said it will delay closing on its previously announced plan to split into two
companies by an additional two weeks, to June 4, marking the second such
postponement. Marriott agreed to the delays in order to continue talks with
bondholders that are suing to block the restructuring.

   Motorola

   said it received tentative agreements from 20 unnamed companies for $ 800
million for its proposed "Iridium" project, a $ 3.37 billion global cellular
phone network, which would put 77 satellites in orbit.

   Ford

   will idle four assembly plants next week to adjust car and truck inventories,
putting 7,000 hourly workers on temporary layoff. Its Norfolk truck plant will
be idled for one week. Ford said it plans a two-week shutdown at its Edison,
N.J., truck plant and at its Wayne, Mich., car and truck plants starting Feb. 1.

   Arco Alaska

   said an oil field in Cook Inlet 32 miles west of Anchorage is big enough to
be developed commercially. Arco Alaska and partner Phllips Petroleum said
production could start as early as 1996.

   REGULATION

   The SEC

   is seeking an injunction and fines against the former auditor for College
Bound, a Boca Raton, Fla., company that markets services that help students pass
college admission tests. Gordon Goldman, a New York accountant, is accused of
falsely stating that College Bound's financial statements were presented in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, the agency said in a
complaint filed in federal court in the District.

   COURTS

   A Manhattan grand jury

   indicted Edward Coyle, a former Shearson manager who monitored brokers'
compliance with securities laws, on charges of allegedly lying to protect a
broker accused of cheating a client. Coyle, 36, faces two counts of mail fraud
and one count of keeping false records.

   EARNINGS

   Oil companies

   reported healthier fourth-quarter results but a weaker year. Sun earned $ 37
million in the quarter, reversing a year-ago loss. Phillips Petroleum's earnings
rose 57 percent in the quarter, while Occidental reported a $ 588 million loss.
For the year, Sun lost $ 559 million, compared with a 1991 loss of $ 387
million. Phillips's 1992 profit fell 30 percent, and for the year Occidental
lost $ 591 million, compared with a $ 460 million 1991 profit.

   Two drug companies

   reported double-digit gains in profits as a result of increased international
sales. Schering-Plough's profits rose 13 percent in the fourth quarter and 12
percent for all of 1992. Rhone-Poulenc Rorer's earnings were up 35 percent in
the quarter and 31 percent in the full year.

   Alex. Brown,

   the Baltimore-based brokerage, said its earnings rose 10 percent in the
fourth quarter and 13 percent for the year. It cited higher revenue in all lines
of business and successful efforts to control costs.

   Capital Cities/ABC's

   profit rose 2.6 percent in the fourth quarter but fell 28 percent for the
year. Cap Cities said that during the fourth quarter it adopted accounting
changes that resulted in a charge of $ 143.2 million. The firm owns TV and radio
stations and several publications.

   Conrail

   earned $ 92 million in the fourth quarter and $ 282 million for the year,
rebounding from a $ 376 million loss and a $ 207 million loss in the respective
year-earlier periods, when Conrail had large write-offs.

   Dow Chemical

   reported losses of $ 248 million for the fourth quarter and $ 489 million for
1992, compared with a $ 92 million loss and a $ 942 million profit in the same
periods a year earlier. It said a fall-off in European business offset gains in
the United States.

   Lotus Development

   reported a 152 percent rise in fourth-quarter earnings, reflecting growth in
its Windows applications programs. For the year, profits rose 87 percent to $
80.4 million.

   Procter & Gamble's

   fiscal second-quarter earnings rose 13 percent, helped by a lower tax rate
and greater sales volume.

   Continental Airlines Holdings

   said its Continental Airlines unit lost $ 149.4 million in the fourth quarter
due mostly to last year's industry price war. For the year, the airline unit
posted a loss of $ 299.4 million, compared with a loss of $ 340.9 million in
1991.

   Weirton Steel

   said its loss for the quarter narrowed to $ 3.3 million from $ 6.6 million in
the year-earlier period. For all of 1992, Weirton said its loss fell to $ 31.8
million from $ 74.7 million a year earlier.

   Singer's

   earnings increased 18 percent in the fourth quarter and 29 percent in all of
1992 following significant revenue growth worldwide.

   Wang

   reported a $ 400,000 profit in the quarter ended Dec. 31, the second of its
fiscal year, compared with a $ 6.8 million loss a year earlier, but the troubled
computer company said currency dealings boosted earnings and revenue dropped 30
percent.

   Bank of Boston Corp.

   reported a fourth-quarter profit of $ 74 million, down from $ 94 million for
the year-earlier period, when earnings were inflated by $ 77 million in one-time
tax benefits. The bank reported a profit of $ 263 million for 1992 after losing
$ 27 million in 1991.

   PEOPLE

   W. Whitley Hawkins

   plans to retire as president of Delta Air Lines March 1. Ronald W. Allen,
Delta's chairman and CEO, will assume the added duties of president and chief
operating officer.

   Paul G. Stern will step down as chief executive of Northern Telecom, but will
remain with the firm as non-executive chairman of its board. Jean C. Monty,
president and chief operating officer, will replace Stern.

LOAD-DATE: October 14, 1993


                             1268 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1993 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           January 27, 1993 Wednesday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 340 words

HEADLINE: Viagene will offer its stock to public

BYLINE: CRAIG D. ROSE, Staff Writer

BODY:

   Viagene Inc., which hopes to begin human testing of an AIDS treatment later
this year, has filed for an initial public offering of 2.5 million shares for
$11 to $13 per share. The 5-year-old company is working on its AIDS treatment in
collaboration with Green Cross Corp. of Osaka, Japan.

   It would be the first product that Viagene has developed to the point of
human testing. The company has projects in earlier stages for the treatment of
hepatitis, herpes, melanoma, cervical cancer, hemophilia and malaria. Viagene is
primarily focused on using gene therapy to combat severe viral infections.

   Gene-transfer technology involves inserting genes into living cells in an
effort to produce therapeutic proteins. Under terms of an agreement reached in
1991, Green Cross has agreed to provide Viagene $40 million in research funding,
equity investments and performance-based payments for a period of up to four
years.

   Green Cross received worldwide marketing rights to products that result from
the joint effort. Viagene also has a three-year agreement with Bayer AG of
Germany to develop a treatment for hemophilia.

   Bayer has agreed to provide up to $9 million to Viagene. In a preliminary
prospectus filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission, Viagene reported a
net loss last year of $3.1 million or $3.05 per share on revenues of $8.4
million. The company also reported working capital of $5.8 million and total
assets of $8.2 million.

   Viagene has had an accumulated deficit of $15.1 million since its founding.
Viagene's major stockholders include Green Cross, which holds 18 percent of its
shares; Aspen Ventures of Boston, holder of a 9.3 percent stake, Biotechnology
Investments Ltd. of the Channel Islands, which holds 9.3 percent; Domain
Partners in Princeton, N.J., which also holds 9.3 percent, and Gensia
Pharmaceuticals Inc., a San Diego-based company that owns 6.8 percent of
Viagene's outstanding stock. First Boston Corp., Prudential Securities Inc. and
Nomura Securities International Inc. are the underwriters for the offering.

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                             1269 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1993 The Buffalo News
                            Buffalo News (New York)



                    January 26, 1993, Tuesday, City Edition

SECTION: LIFESTYLES; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 174 words

HEADLINE: BLOOD CLOTTING BREAKTHROUGH

BODY:

    The recent approval by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration of the first
genetically engineered form of Factor VIII -- the clotting factor for the
treatment of hemophilia A -- is being hailed as a breakthrough by the National
Hemophilia Foundation.

   "Not only will this new medication permit patients to treat hemophilia using
a non-blood-sourced product, but importantly, it also represents a significant
advance toward gene therapy for hemophilia, and ultimately toward a cure," said
Dr. Glen F. Pierce, NHF president.

   Factor VIII, which enables blood to clot, previously had been obtained from
donor blood. Before the development of tests to detect infectious viruses in
blood, many hemophiliacs contracted viral infections.

LOAD-DATE: January 29, 1993


                             1270 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                 January 25, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section D; Page 6; Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 544 words

HEADLINE: Equity Issues This Week

BODY:

   The following equity offerings are expected this week:

   American Re Corp., Princeton, N.J., initial public offering of 10.75 million
common shares. Merrill Lynch.

    Arkansas Best Corp., Fort Smith, Ark., 1.3 million common shares of $50
cumulative convertible preferred. Morgan Stanley.

   Biosurface Technology Inc., Cambridge, Mass, initial public offering of 2
million common shares. Hambrecht & Quist.

   Calgene Inc., Davis, Calif., 2 million common shares, 1.6 million in the U.S.
Paine Webber.

   Cocensy's Inc., Irvine, Calif., initial public offering of 2.5 million common
shares. Montgomery Securities.

   DF&R Restaurants Inc., Bedford, Tex., 1.85 million common shares. Dean
Witter.

   Dr Pepper/Seven-Up Cos., Dallas, 20.5 million common shares, 16 million in
the U.S. Morgan Stanley.

   Dell Computer Corp., Austin, Tex., 4 million common shares. Goldman, Sachs.

   Genesis Health Ventures Inc., 2.9 million common shares. Merrill Lynch.

   Genetic Therapy Inc., Gaithersburg, Md., 2 million common shares. Smith
Barney, Harris Upham.

   Kohl's Corp., Menomonee Falls, Wis., 4.25 million common shares. Morgan
Stanley.

   Lincoln National Corp., Fort Wayne, Ind., 4 million common shares. Goldman,
Sachs.

   Magainin Pharmaceuticals Inc., Plymouth Meeting, Pa., 3.5 million common
shares. Hambrecht & Quist.

   Mathsoft Inc., Cambridge, Mass., 2.5 million common shares. Alex. Brown.

   MTC Electronic Tech Co., $50 million of senior subordinated convertible
debentures due 2002. Daiwa Securities.

   MTC Electronic Tech Co., Richmond, B.C., 5 million common shares. Daiwa
Securities.

   Nine West Group, Stamford, Conn., initial public offering of 8 million common
shares, 6.4 million in the U.S. Merrill Lynch.

   Orbital Sciences, Fairfax, Va., $55 million of convertible subordinated
debentures due 2003, Caa/CCC+. Lehman Brothers.

   Paragon Trade Brands Inc., Tacoma, Wash., initial public offering of 10
million common shares. Merrill Lynch.

   Rhone-Poulenc S.A., 4 million American depositary shares in the U.S.,
representing 1 million ordinary class A shares. Morgan Stanley.

   Shaman Pharmaceuticals Inc., San Carlos, Calif., initial public offering of
2.5 million common shares. S. G. Warburg.

   Standard Management Corp., Indianapolis, initial public offering of 1.6
million common shares. Nomura Securities.

   Sterling Software, Dallas, $85 million of convertible subordinated debentures
due 2003, B-1/B+. Alex. Brown.

   Telios Pharmaceuticals Inc., San Diego, 4 million common shares. Hambrecht &
Quist.

   Tejas Power Corp., Houston, 5 million common shares. Dillon Read.

   Triplex Pharma Corp., The Woodlands, Texas, initial public offering of 2.5
million common shares. First Boston.

   U.S. Robotics Inc., Skokie, Ill., 2.5 million common shares. Hambrecht &
Quist.

   Univax Biologics Inc., Rockville, Md., 2.5 million common shares. Prudential
Securities.

   Viratek Inc., Costa Mesa, Calif., 1.25 million units, each consisting of 1
common share and 1 five-year purchase warrant. H. J. Meyers.

   Wellpoint Health Networks, Woodland Hills, Calif., 15 million common shares,
12 million in the U.S. and Canada. Merrill Lynch.

   Western Digital Corp., Irvine, Calif., 5 million common shares. First Boston.

   Source: MCM CorporateWatch.

   Ratings: Moody's/Standard & Poor's.

LOAD-DATE: January 25, 1993


                             1271 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                    January 22, 1993 Friday, FINAL / LORAIN

SECTION: METRO; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 983 words

HEADLINE: SHOCKING LEGACY: GENETIC DISORDER IN FATHER, DAUGHTER

BYLINE: By MOLLY KAVANAUGH; PLAIN DEALER REPORTER

DATELINE: BROWNHELM TOWNSHIP

BODY:

   "I knew there was some kind of problem" is how Margaret Halter begins the
story of a rare congenital disease that was a silent guest at her wedding 10
years ago.

   At the time she and John Halter were married, all she knew was that her
husband's brother had died at age 13 of a congenital illness that strikes young
boys. She didn't know her husband could develop the illness in his prime or that
they might have a daughter who carries the disease.

   The 32-year-old mother was not alone. Ten years ago, no one knew much about
the illness, adrenoleukodystrophy (ALD). But the medical knowledge, though still
limited, has grown since 1987, when Halter first suspected her husband's chronic
leg problems were symptoms of the disease that killed his brother.

   ALD is a genetic disorder that affects males but is transmitted by females.
It typically shows up in young boys and often is misdiagnosed as a learning
disability. Hearing, speech and sight losses follow, along with the inability to
walk. In severe cases, the child becomes totally helpless and dies within two to
four years.

   Adult men can suffer a much milder form of the illness, usually experiencing
weakness and stiffening in the legs, as John Halter does, and gradually
experiencing other losses over decades.

   Only 3,000 people, representing 650 families in the United States, have been
diagnosed with ALD. There is no cure and no conclusive treatment available,
though several therapies are being tested.

   Because of its rarity, few doctors and even fewer non-medical individuals
have ever heard of the illness.

   That will soon change. The movie "Lorenzo's Oil," which opens today in
Cleveland and elsewhere, tells the story of a Washington, D.C., family whose
6-year-old son, Lorenzo Odone, developed ALD in the mid-1980s.

   Lorenzo's parents, played in the movie by Nick Nolte and Susan Sarandon,
refused to accept the doctor's statement that their son would be dead in two
years. They helped develop an edible oil that lowers the levels of certain fatty
acids that accumulate to dangerous levels in ALD patients.

   Lorenzo is now 14. He cannot walk or talk but communicates by blinking and
wiggling his fingers.

   Like the Odones, Halter has made it her business to educate herself about
ALD, collecting articles, newsletters and phone numbers of doctors and families.

   "I stuck myself in the hospital library," said Halter, a former medical
technician now studying to be a nurse. "You just start looking everywhere."

   Her 34-year-old husband, who was a teen-ager when his brother died, does not
share her thirst for knowledge.

   "I'm not sure what he wants to know about it at this point," she said. "I
have to watch to make sure he doesn't throw (the newsletters, etc.) out."

   He declined to be interviewed for this article.

   Her husband had always had coordination problems, which Halter accepted as
normal.

   In 1987, John took ill during a family vacation. Back home, he appeared to
recover, but his coordination worsened and his legs shook, often robbing him of
sleep.

   One doctor said he had multiple sclerosis. A second concluded he was just a
klutz. Halter's reaction to the doctors' diagnosis was to learn more about the
congenital disease that afflicted John's brother.

   In late 1991 John took the ALD blood test.

   "Well, I think I knew I had it," Halter recalled him saying when the test
came back positive.

   The diagnosis sent her back to the library to research what it meant for her
children: Jessica, now 9, and John III, 6. She contacted a doctor from Seattle
who assured her that her son would not have the illness but that her daughter is
a carrier and has a 50% chance of passing it on to her children.

   "I don't know when I'll be having that heart-to-heart talk with her," Halter
said.

   There is little to conclude about her husband's future, she said, because the
adult form of ALD is even rarer than the childhood form. John works full time on
an assembly line and during periods of low stress gets around pretty well, she
said.

   Regularly, though, his legs give out when he is doing something simple, like
walking across the room. Swimming is the one activity he can do, and the family
swims together year-round.

   This summer Halter plans to attend the annual United Leukodystrophy
Foundation conference in Illinois with her mother-in-law in the hopes of meeting
more women with ALD-afflicted husbands.

   Eventually she wants to examine the death certificates in his family, to see
if there were deaths attributed to multiple sclerosis or other disorders that
might actually have been caused by ALD.

   She thinks her husband could benefit from Lorenzo's oil and hopes to enroll
him in the trials, which are supervised by Dr. Hugo Moser in Baltimore but can
be conducted at home.

   Moser, who treated Lorenzo and is in the midst of a five-year trial using a
mixture of two glyceryl oils, named Lorenzo's oil, said he was not consulted
about the movie.

   "Preliminary data suggest that patients with milder forms of ALD are
benefited (by the oil), while those with the severe form of the disease are
not," Moser said in a statement released in conjunction with the movie's
opening. "Conclusive evaluation cannot be achieved until the five year trial is
completed."

   Dr. David Rothner, chief of pediatric neurology at the Cleveland Clinic, said
gene therapy for ALD is also promising.

   "I think things are looking up, in the long run," Rothner said.

   Halter, who saw a preview of "Lorenzo's Oil," said she enjoyed the movie but
faulted it for being misleading about the oil.

   "(The movie) makes it look like it's so easily accessible," she said. "I
think the biggest accomplishment (of the movie) is that it could educate some
people."

   Her mother-in-law and some of her husband's relatives have said they will see
the movie. But not John. Said Halter: "He said he lived through it, he doesn't
want to see it."

LOAD-DATE: February 5, 1993


                             1272 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1993 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                   January 21, 1993, Thursday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: FASHION; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 2623 words

HEADLINE: FUTURE FASHION & BEAUTY;
COSMEDICS;
Cosmetics industry moving into medical world

BYLINE: LINDA GILLAN GRIFFIN, Houston Chronicle Fashion Editor; Staff

BODY:

   Changes in the next seven years will set the tone for a new
millennium, especially in the areas of fashion and beauty.

   The Chronicle continues its examinations of these changes in
Part 2 of a four-part series, looking today at trends in the beauty
and personal care industry, including crossovers in the fields of
medicines and cosmetics.

   HORST Rechelbacher speaks with a note of mounting concern.

   Eight people who have set out to live for two years in a sealed
environment in the middle of the Arizona desert are losing weight.

   But what the weight-loss unmasks is even scarier than
problems that confront them in their three-acre dome.

   ""I'm closely involved with the Biosphere,'' says
Rechelbacher.  ""The Biospherians have each lost 40 or 50 pounds
since they have been in there.  They are undergoing weekly
monitoring -- blood and every function of the body -- and when they
started losing weight, they found insecticides in their bodies that
had been banned for 10 or 20 years.  And they didn't find them until
they'd lost weight, so what they suspect is that fat in the body
acts as a storehouse for toxins. ''

   Rechelbacher gulps air and continues.  ""So if we eliminate
fats from the diet . . .  '' But then he's off again, talking about
how the toxins get into our bodies in the first place.

   ""How pure the fumes are that we breathe is of great
importance for general health, so that cellular structure doesn't
begin to deteriorate.  And, after all, that's what aging is and what
disease is -- cellular deterioration. ''

   One might assume from the discourse that Rechelbacher is a
physician, a medical researcher or maybe an environmental
scientist.  In reality, he is founder and CEO of Aveda Corp. and one
of a new breed in the beauty and personal care industry that is
pressing the crossover between his field and that of medicine,
people who care about more than just pretty faces.

   ""I should say that we are being taught more and more by the
doctors,'' said Rechelbacher.  ""I'm really seeing that there is a
close relationship between medical and beauty professionals, and
now in spas and beauty centers, the two often share office space. ''
The medical people don't have time to pamper the clients, however;
they leave that part to people trained in personal care.

   Today the crossover crops up more and more often, in
plastic/aesthetic surgery, in prescription/beauty drugs, in
nutrition/beauty supplements -- so many crossovers that
practitioners as well as the products might well be dubbed
""cosmedics. ''

   The future of today's cosmetic industry will be up to the
companies that approach problems and solutions from a scientific
point of view.  The future of the branches of medicine that deal
with the aesthetics of the human body -- dermatology and plastic
surgery -- have their courses well-charted.

   ""There is a lot of interest right now for developing drugs
that can be targeted to a particular part of the body.  A lot of
research is going on in the area of molecular biology, gene
therapy, introducing a specific gene into the skin, a hormone or
chemical that can cure certain types of disease,'' said Dr. John
Wolf, professor and head of the Department of Dermatology, Baylor
College of Medicine.

   ""I think that this field is ready to explode. ''

   Skin diseases from psoriasis to the rare epidermolytic
hyperkeratosis seem to be genetically controlled, said Wolf.  ""The
first laboratory problem is to identify the gene that causes that
defect, then come up with a cure.  But they have the first step. ''

   Wolf also sees this genetic engineering as the answer to such
problems as hereditary hair loss in men and women, and to skin
aging -- the big, bad W word in beauty circles, wrinkles.

   There are different types of skin aging, said Wolf --
inevitable aging, genetically determined aspects of aging and
environmental aging, from the sun or cigarette smoking.  ""But it's
possible you could come up with a smart drug that would go in and
target fibroblasts to produce more collagen in the skin.  Gene
therapy could do everything from treating the rare disease to very
common ones, even skin cancers and hair loss and wrinkles.

   ""Whenever you look at drugs like Retin-A and Rogaine, the
two most prominent examples of drugs that have gone through the
full scientific process, you have to be aware that every
pharmaceutical company is aware that something can be done in these
fields,'' said Wolf.  ""These products have proven it can be done.

   ""I used to tell my patients to save their money, but now I
tell them it may be worth it,'' Wolf said.  ""Something can be done,
and now a whole lot of people are out there looking for other
products that may be better.

   ""We have cosmetic companies making biological claims based
in biologic fact and medical pharmaceutical companies making
Rogaine and Retin-A,'' Wolf said.  ""The facts are very hard to
ascertain.  Right now, as long as something is marketed as a
cosmetic, it doesn't have to withstand the scrutiny of going
through FDA (Food and Drug Administration) approval.  But if you
developed Retin-A in your garage, you'd still have to go through
years of testing so that all the facts would be known and they'd be
right out on the table. ''

   One finger Wolf points is at products containing collagen or
elastin.  ""Applied to the surface of the skin they most certainly
will not do what they claim to do.  The collagen molecule is too big
to get through the skin, and if it did somehow, it would just be
washed away.

   ""You have to, number one, simulate production of collagen in
your own body -- that's what Retin-A does -- or take collagen and
inject it into the skin with a needle.  Even then the body washes it
away, so it's only good for four to six months. ''

   But Wolf sees advantages to cosmetic products, too,
particularly if the creams contain a sunscreen.  ""If you used it
every day, from an early age, and avoided excessive sunlight, you
would definitely decrease wrinkles.  You could see an enormous
difference.  But there is no evidence that just using a moisturizer
will prevent aging of the skin. ''

   Aromas promote healing

   One area Rechelbacher finds particularly interesting is environmental
pollution -- and that humans are becoming sick
because of pollution in their homes and workplaces.  Gases released
from carpets, furniture and cleaning compounds are quite similar to
dangerous chemicals.  Even in the great outdoors, toxic exhaust
fumes contain free radicals that can cause skin to lose its snap.

   On the other hand, certain gases or aromas can actually
promote healing and well-being.  Aromatherapy is the term the
non-medical industry uses.

   ""Most plants have aromas to a certain degree,'' said
Rechelbacher, ""but in particularly aromatic plants, the gas is
very vibrant.  Those gases have potency, and in chemical structure
are natural antiseptics, stimulants, calming agents -- very
practical chemicals which can be used in foods and to purify the
air. '' Aveda has come out with a whole series of products designed
to be sprayed into the air.  ""They can even discourage the desire
to smoke. ''

   Beauty more than skin-deep

   ""I have always felt that whatever we surround ourselves with
should be nurturing, that things we use outside should be as
healthy as what we take inside our bodies.  Taking that further into
cosmetics, we have surrounded ourselves with pharmacologists who
are looking at us from a pure food-quality, nutritional point of
view,'' said Rechelbacher.

   ""It is true that a certain amount of cosmetics penetrate
through the skin, but it is also clear that skin care is determined
not only by the exterior but also the interior, an absolute
combination of both. '' Since there are definite limitations for
exterior products, ""that's why the interior is really the point of
view we are taking at the present. ''

   All of a sudden nutrition is becoming a large part of self
management -- smart food as opposed to smart drugs, food
concentrates and plant nutrients that can cause rejuvenations or at
least prevent the aging process.  These nutrients are now being
given to people with diseases, but they could also have important
effects on people who don't have diseases, said Rechelbacher.

   ""Beauty is wellness, and I see it becoming more
sophisticated.  We're just in the infancy of cellular genetic
engineering, but it's going to go so fast that in five to 10 years
we will have the science to prolong life for 10 or 20 years,'' said
Rechelbacher.  ""I really believe that that's how close we are to
understanding genetic engineering. ''

   Some cosmetics aren't safe

   It's important that people identify the sources of products
they use on a daily basis -- whether, for example, their lipsticks
are poisoning their lips or their tub cleansers are frying their
lungs.  For decades we considered certain products advanced until we
discovered that some of their ingredients -- petroleum derivatives,
alcohol, nylon, formaldehyde, sodium lauryl sulfate, artificial
colorings and preservatives -- were not only offensive but
downright dangerous.

   Aveda, said Rechelbacher, uses only small amounts of
petrochemicals in a few of its products -- a few coloring agents in
2 percent or 3 percent of the entire cosmetic line.  ""And the only
reason why we use them is because we haven't found plant
substitutes yet.  Also, all preservatives today are still
petrochemical preservatives.  In everything else we have learned how
to substitute plant products.  Our aromas are as pure as inhaling
pure aromas from nature. ''
 Wound-healing studies show a day-and-night difference between
using petrochemical and natural plant preservatives.  Artificial
ones, said Rechelbacher, increase skin perspiration, cause muscle
tension, change brain waves to high frequency and lower body
temperature.  ""Which means people are breaking out in a cold sweat,
so to speak.  Those are symptoms of fear and stress, and they are
caused by cosmetics.  And the poor consumer does not even know it's
going on because it's going on on a daily basis.  It's a subliminal
process.  We are polluting ourselves and we don't even know we're
doing it because we live in pollution. ''

   The move to pure plant products is extending even to
applicators.  Johnson's Pure Cotton Products includes balls, rounds,
squares and swabs whitened without chlorine and packaged in
resealable packages to stay clean.  ""Beware cheaper, look-alike
rayon blends,'' the ad copy warns.

   Advertising steps right up

   How companies advertise their skin-care and cosmetic products
is a controversial issue today, and the FDA is clamping down on
cosmetics companies that can't back up their claims with scientific
evidence.  In the United States, unless a product undergoes
scientific studies, testing and animal testing, it cannot make
medical claims.

   Suggestions, however, don't appear to be forbidden, as in
this ad: ""If you're anti-wrinkles, anti-aging, anti-sun damage,
you're pro-Neutrogena''; therefore the company hopes you'll try
Neutrogena Intensified Day Moisture, SPF 15.

   Many cosmetic and skin care product names hint at medicinal
powers.  Witness Coty's Thick 'N Healthy Mascara and La Prairie's
Age Management Serum.

   An Aveda spokesperson said the company can claim that its
lipsticks are breath-freshening and aid in digestion, as well as
make the lips tingle when they're applied.  Similar claims are made
for cosmetics in many of the new natural and botanical lines.

   Another area in which crossover between the medical and
personal care fields has occurred is in surgical procedures.  Dr.
Melvin Spira, head of the Department of Plastic Surgery, Baylor
College of Medicine, and president of the American Association of
Plastic Surgeons, said plastic surgery -- especially aesthetic
plastic surgery -- is still a growing field.

   In 1990, surgeons performed about 50,000 face lifts, about
25-30 percent more than nine years ago.  In the same year, there
were 80,000 blethropasties (eyelid operations) and 70,000
rhinoplasty operations (nose jobs, in the vernacular).  And
liposuction has become one of the most common procedures.

   Breast augmentations (implants) were probably the most common
form of plastic surgery in 1990 -- there were 90,000 that year --
but the number has come down considerably due to problems with
silicone implants.  While it's not in the same class, otoplasty (ear
pin-back operations) are less common now, too, probably because
hair is longer.

   Brow lifts to treat forehead frown lines and sagging eyebrows
were minimal 10 years ago but are now one of the most common
operations.  And the abdominal plasty (tummy tuck) has gained
considerable favor, but the buttock lift and thigh lift are rare.

   Deep chemical peels using phenol have given way to a series
of lighter peels, using trichloracetic acid, administered during
office visits.  And some prescription (Retin-A) and non-prescription
(alphahydroxy acid) peel products can be administered at home.

   ""It's just as much part and parcel as putting on lipstick
for some women,'' said Spira.

   Once again, however, there is crossover between what is a
drug and what is a cosmetic.  New products that contain alpha
hydroxy acid have more in common with Retin-A than with cosmetic
scrubs, reports Cosmetics Counter Update.  But because they are not
considered drugs, they require no prescription.  Like Retin-A,
""both are acids that unglue dead skin cells and encourage new cell
growth. ''

   The acids are relatively cheap and derived from the real
McCoy -- sugar cane, citrus fruits, apples, grapes and even sour
milk.  AHAs on the market today include glycolic, lactic, malic,
citric and tartaric acids.  And some new AHA products include Estee
Lauder's Fruition Triple Reactivating Complex, Avon's Anew,
Elizabeth Arden's Ceramide Time Complex Moisture Cream and Murad's
Skin Smoothing Cream.

   To back up its claims, Estee Lauder produced seven color
slides of charts for its Fruition press kit.  Yet nowhere does the
information say how much AHA is included.  Going on the market Feb.
1, a single ounce, in a cobalt blue glass bottle, will sell for
$ 42.50.  According to Paula Begoun, who puts out Cosmetics Counter
Update and bills herself as the ""Ralph Nader of Rouge,'' a jar or
bottle of Neoteric's Alpha Hydrox sells for less than $ 10 at your
local drugstore.

   Facing up to face lifts

   But back to plastic surgery: How long face lifts should last
remains a perennial question.  ""There's an old saying,'' said
Spira, ""that a plastic surgeon turns back the clock but doesn't
stop it from running.  If it ran fast before the surgery, it will
run fast afterward.  Did the individual take care of his skin, did
he smoke, did he look younger before? ''

   While there seems to be a tendency for surgeons to encourage
having face lifts at younger ages, ""if the individual doesn't have
signs of aging, it shouldn't be done.  There is no such thing as a
prophylactic face lift,'' Spira said.



   How to tell if you need a face lift

   Dr.Melvin Spira, chairman of the Department of Plastic
Surgery, Baylor College of Medicine, suggests a simple test to
determine whether you are a candidate for a face lift:

   ""One of the simplest things I do is have the patient lie
down with a hand mirror and look straight up at it.

   ""If they like what they see, they're probably a candidate,
but they should know they probably won't look any better than what
they see in that hand mirror. ''

GRAPHIC: Photos: 1. Model wearing smock courtesy of the Professional Uniform
Center, medical equipment was borrowed from Homedeq Inc. Products on the medical
tray include an array of skin treatments and cosmetics (color); 2. Walgreen's
pharmacist Salma Kabli displays Rogaine hair regrowth treatment and Retin-A skin
exfoliant and rejuvenator (color, p. 3); 3. Origins Sensory Therapy Peace of
Mind, Aveda Natural Colour cosmetics (color, p. 3); 4. An array of skin
treatments and cosmetics (color, p. 3); 5.La Prairie's Age Management Serum
(color); 6.Model wearing Fernard Aubry mask (color, p. 3); 7. Estee Lauder's
Fruition Triple Reactivating Complex (color, p. 4); 8. Origins Mint Wash (color,
p. 4); 9. Yves Saint Laurent microencapsulated Principe Actif (color, p. 4); 10.
Aveda Natural Colour lipsticks (color, p.4); 11. La Prairie Cellular Emergency
Tonic (color, p. 4); 12. Prescriptives Line Preventor (color, p. 4); 13.
Elizabeth Arden Really Great Mascara (color, p. 4); Graph: 14. How to tell if
you need a face lift (b/w, p. 5, TEXT); 1-2, 4. Buster Dean/Chronicle, 3, 5,
8-9., 11-12. Steve Ueckert/Chronicle

LOAD-DATE: January 22, 1993


                             1273 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1993 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe



                     January 17, 1993, Sunday, City Edition

SECTION: ECONOMY; Pg. 80

LENGTH: 351 words

HEADLINE: News in biotech;
FAST TRACK / INSIDE BUSINESS

BYLINE: By RONALD ROSENBERG, Globe Staff

BODY:

    During the next 10 years, biotechnology product sales will increase from $
4.3 billion this year to $ 9.4 billion in 1998 to $ 20.2 billion by 2003,
according to a new study by Consulting Resources Corp., a Lexington management
consultant. That's a compounded average annual growth rate of 17 percent. The
firm notes that human therapeutics will account for 70 percent, or almost $ 3
billion, of biotechnology product sales in 1993. About half of those sales will
come from EPO, a hormone that regulates the production of red blood cells to
reduce the need for blood transfusions, and granulocyte colony simulating
factor, known as Neupogen, which stimulates infection-fighting white cells in
cancer patients. Both are produced by Amgen Inc. of Thousand Oaks, Calif. The
fastest growing biotech product segments, albeit smaller than human
therapeutics, are in nonmedical diagnostics, such as compounds used to detect
pesticides and toxins in the environment and agriculture, such as rot-resistant
tomatoes . . .  Although Boston University president John Silber's personal
finances are under review by the Massachusetts attorney general's office, the
former gubernatorial candidate recently increased his personal stake in Seragen
Inc., the Hopkinton biotech company is 70 percent owned by the university. Just
before Thanksgiving, he bought 5,000 shares of Seragen at $ 12 a share, bringing
his total holdings to 105,000, according to The Washington Service, which tracks
stock buys and sales of corporate directors and large trades. Based on the
company's recent $ 14 stock price, his shares are worth nearly $ 1.5 million . .
.  Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. of Cambridge said last week that it received the
commercial rights from the University of North Carolina for its carboxylase
technology, a protein critical to Factor IX, a vital blood protein deficient in
about 3,000 patients with hemophilia B. Transkaryotic, a gene therapy company,
said it hopes to treat these patients, who suffer life-threatening bleeding
episodes. The company hopes to launch clinical trials later this year.

LOAD-DATE: January 20, 1993


                             1274 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                 January 17, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2; Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 157 words

HEADLINE: JAN. 10-16;
Gene Therapy For Blood Diseases

BYLINE: By WARREN E. LEARY

BODY:

   Thousands suffering with sickle cell disease and related blood disorders got
heartening news last week as researchers reported promising, early results with
a form of gene therapy.

   Dr. Susan P. Perrine of Children's Hospital Oakland Research Institute in
Oakland, Calif., and colleagues elsewhere reported preliminary, but dramatic,
results using a natural fatty acid called arginine butyrate to treat three
patients with sickle cell anemia and three with beta thalassemia.

    The intravenous therapy switched on a gene that normally stops working at
birth. The gene started making healthy hemoglobin, the oxygen-carrying protein
of red blood cells that is defective in those suffering with the inherited,
incurable blood disorders that can shorten a life span.

   Further tests with more patients are needed to see if the treatment is
beneficial, and Dr. Perrine is working on an oral form of the drug that would be
easier to use.

GRAPHIC: Photo: A normal red blood cell, top, and a sickled cell. (Irene
Piscopo)

LOAD-DATE: January 17, 1993


                             1275 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1993 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times



                  January 15, 1993, FRIDAY , LATE SPORTS FINAL

SECTION: NEWS; NATION BRIEFINGS; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 660 words

BODY:
 CHRISTOPHER CREDIBLE: The Senate Foreign Relations Committee accepted Secretary
of State-designate Warren Christopher's 1977 testimony before it, in which he
denied knowing about Army spying on anti-war activists when he was deputy
attorney general in the 1960s. Chairman Claiborne Pell (D-R.I.) told
President-elect Bill Clinton's nominee that the panel's staff had examined
classified documents and found none of the material to be inconsistent with
Christopher's original statements.  NEW STEALTH BOOST: The military has found a
way to make the costly, controversial B-2 Stealth bomber as evasive as
originally promised, Air Force Secretary Donald B. Rice said. Several
modifications to the plane's surface and edge structure will give it "the levels
of survivability that were intended in the beginning," he said. The planes, each
costing more than $ 2 billion to build, have been plagued by problems since
1991. The Air Force, which originally wanted 132 of the B-2s, has settled on a
fleet of 20, with four still awaiting congressional approval.  LOFTY ENDEAVOUR:
Endeavour's five astronauts powered up an apparatus containing 28 diverse
biological tests a day after they lifted off and accomplished the main goal of
their six-day shuttle mission, releasing a $ 200 million communications
satellite. But the crew had to abort one key experiment. A $ 14 million X-ray
spectrometer, designed to explore the hot, mysterious gases between stars in the
Milky Way, was shut off because of data fluctuations. Ground scientists tried to
resolve the problem.  DAM WATCHED AS IT WORKS: Engineers kept close watch on
Coolidge Dam in Arizona as floodwaters gushed through its overflow spillways for
the first time since 1983. The 250-foot Coolidge - once dubbed most dangerous of
the federal dams - is in the early stages of a two-year program to strengthen
the rock to which it is anchored. "I think the possibility of a collapse or
failure is very remote," said Ken Clouser, dam-safety coordinator for the
Phoenix office of the Bureau of Indian Affairs, which built and operates the dam
in a Gila River canyon.  CLINTON MORE POPULAR NOW: Bill Clinton's popularity has
soared since he defeated President Bush in the Nov. 3 election - even though a
majority of registered voters believe the president-elect already is
backpedaling from campaign promises. These were findings in a joint survey
conducted by Republican pollster Ed Goeas and Democrat Celinda Lake. They said
71 percent of the respondents had a favorable opinion of Clinton; 20 percent
were unfavorable. On Election Day, they said, voters were split 50-50 on
Clinton's favorability factor.  INSURANCE EMERGENCY: Nearly half of the people
waiting in hospital emergency rooms don't need urgent care, but an emergency
room is the only place they can be treated because they lack health insurance, a
General Accounting Office study found. Emergency room visits rose 19 percent
nationwide from 1985 through 1990, or from about 84 million to 99 million
patients a year, Congress' investigative arm said. "People are using emergency
rooms because they have no other choice," said Sen. Donald W. Riegle Jr.
(D-Mich.), who requested the study.  POVERTY SPLITS: Poor parents are nearly
twice as likely to break up as those with money, the Census Bureau found in the
government's first study of the effects of financial hard times on the family.
One of seven married couples below the poverty line splits up, compared with one
of 13 with higher incomes, the bureau said. The study tracked families for two
years in the 1980s.  GENETIC HOPE FOR DYING: A panel of scientists, lawyers and
ethicists opened the door for dying patients to seek experimental and possibly
dangerous genetic therapies. The National Institutes of Health Recombinant DNA
Advisory Committee voted 9-3 to allow the controversial treatment in emergency
cases, when there was not enough time for it to convene and make its own
decision.

LOAD-DATE: January 31, 1993


                             1276 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1993 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                     January 15, 1993, Friday, Home Edition

SECTION: Metro; Part B; Page 8; Column 3; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 277 words

HEADLINE: 'COMPASSIONATE APPROVALS' FOR UNPROVEN GENE THERAPIES OKD

BYLINE: From Times Wire and Staff Reports

BODY:

   Prompted by a case involving a San Diego woman dying of brain cancer, a
government advisory committee ruled Wednesday that the director of the National
Institutes of Health could issue "compassionate approvals" for the use of
unproven gene therapies in medical emergencies. The decision is expected to
result in a flood of hundreds, perhaps thousands, of requests for such waivers
for terminally ill patients.

   The decision grew out of a request by physicians at the San Diego Regional
Cancer Center for approval to treat the 51-year-old woman with a form of gene
therapy that has not yet been proved successful in animal trials. Dr. Bernadine
Healey, NIH director, issued the approval because of the possibility that the
woman might die before the advisory committee could meet. The treatments began
Jan. 4.

   Critics have charged undue political influence in the San Diego case because
the request for compassionate approval was forwarded by Sen. Tom Harkin
(D-Iowa), who chairs the subcommittee that funds NIH. The San Diego woman's
sister-in-law was a campaign worker for Harkin and her husband has held posts in
four U.S. administrations.

   Harkin has said that he merely asked the NIH to set up guidelines for
handling such requests -- which the committee did Wednesday. Healey said
political considerations played no role in her approval of the San Diego
request.

   Although some committee members feared that unproven gene therapies might
prove hazardous to patients and health care workers, the committee voted 9 to 3
to permit the compassionate approvals. But it also required that the NIH
director return to the panel and justify each approval.


                             1277 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1993 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            January 15, 1993 Friday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-1

LENGTH: 901 words

HEADLINE: Panel is divided over unproven gene therapy

BYLINE: DORI MEINERT, Copley News Service

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   WASHINGTON -- A federal panel appointed to oversee gene therapy in the United
States yesterday hotly debated a top health official's decision to bypass the
committee and allow doctors to try an unproven treatment on a dying San Diego
woman. "Today, I stand by that decision," Dr. Bernadine Healy, director of the
National Institutes of Health, told the NIH committee of doctors, ethicists and
lawyers. The Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee later voted 9-3 to allow the NIH
director to approve time-sensitive requests when the panel can't convene in time
to make a decision.

   The agency then would have to report back to the committee to explain its
action. Because gene therapy research is in its infancy, the advisory panel
wants to keep a tight rein on its usage as it attempts to balance public safety
with the needs of patients and researchers.

   Healy bypassed the committee, which is supposed to vote on all gene therapy
proposals, when she approved a request by Drs. Ivor Royston and Robert Sobol of
the San Diego Regional Cancer Center to try an unproven therapy on the woman,
who has a brain tumor.

   The Food and Drug Administration already had given its approval. Urging the
NIH committee to develop guidelines for dealing with such urgent appeals on
behalf of dying patients, sometimes called compassionate-plea requests, Healy
said that changes in science and public need made it inevitable that the issue
would arise. "The promise of gene therapy is too great, the need of the patient
community is too desperate and, frankly, the reach of modern communication is
too wide," she said. Had a policy been in place when the San Diego woman's
family first sought help for her, her husband told the committee yesterday, "we
might have been able to do it 30 days earlier."

   The husband made an impassioned plea to the committee on behalf of other
families who may make emergency requests. Time is critical for someone who is
given just one or two months to live, the husband said, and although the gene
therapy is unproven, it is a last chance for people who are dying anyway.
Members of the 51-year-old patient's family have requested her name be withheld
for privacy reasons. The San Diego woman received her first injection of
genetically altered cells last week.

   The cells were altered to contain a gene for interleukin 2, a protein that
Royston and Sobol believe could stimulate the patient's immune system to attack
the tumor. Committee members who favored a more restrictive policy on emergency
requests for experimental gene therapy worried yesterday that the use of
unproven treatments would endanger the public, interfere with more statistically
valid group studies and encourage false hopes among the dying. "You're taking
the public out of the loop and putting the decision into the hands of people who
really don't have the public in mind," said committee member Dusty Miller of the
Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center in Seattle. Katharine Matthews, attorney
for The Foundation on Economic Trends, threatened to sue the agency if public
scrutiny over the use of gene therapy is reduced. However, Nancy Buc, a
Washington lawyer who sits on the committee and who supported the new policy,
said: "This is a risk that has to be taken. Otherwise, patients will be held
hostage to guidelines that never had this in mind." Committee members also
criticized the La Jolla doctors for failing to seek review of their work
earlier.

   The doctors promised to make a detailed presentation of their treatment
method in March, but said they didn't know they had to seek committee approval
for treatment of a single patient. Prior to the injection of the San Diego
woman, the altered cells had been used only in animal tests. The San Diego case
was discussed at the committee's December meeting, but a vote couldn't be taken
because of inadequate public notice that the item would be on the agenda. The
panel meets four times a year, further limiting its ability to address urgent
requests. Several committee members yesterday questioned the credibility of
Royston and Sobol and suggested that they were trying to evade committee review.
"I assure you there are no base motives here," Royston responded.

   "I think this committee is way off track, based on what I'm hearing around
this table . . . . I do not want to hear from this committee that I'm trying to
evade this committee." The La Jolla researchers previously had submitted a very
similar gene therapy protocol to be used for other types of cancer, but the
committee deferred approval and asked the scientists to go back to the lab and
do additional tests in animals.

   Royston and Sobol say those tests are under way and they plan reapply for
approval later this year. A San Diego member of the NIH committee, UCSD
molecular biologist E. Peter Geiduschek, relayed his concerns to the meeting by
telephone yesterday but did not participate in the voting, which took place
later. Previously, however, Geiduschek commented that he considered the approval
given Royston to be premature and apparently the result of political
intervention within the federal government that would be unavailable to most
people. Earlier, at the behest of the patient's sister, U.S. Sen. Tom Harkin of
Iowa wrote a letter to Healy asking that a compassionate exemption be
considered.

   The patient's husband, a businessman, also has connections through past
service to the government.

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                             1278 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1993 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                         January 15, 1993 Friday, THIRD

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A6

LENGTH: 637 words

HEADLINE: DYING PATIENTS GET OK FOR EXPERIMENTAL THERAPY

BYLINE: By RICHARD L. VERNACI Associated Press writer

DATELINE: BETHESDA, MD.

BODY:

   An advisory committee of scientists, lawyers and ethicists opened the door
Thursday for dying patients to seek experimental and possibly dangerous genetic
therapies.

   The issue surfaces as a San Diego woman with a terminal brain tumor is
receiving injections of genetically altered human cells. The controversial
therapy, designed to attack the tumor, was approved for her alone by Barnadine
Healy, director of the National Institutes of Health.

   "Today I stand by that decision," Healy told NIH's Recombinant DNA Advisory
Committee, a panel of scientists, ethicists and lawyers who normally advise the
government about genetic research.

   After its deliberations Thursday, the committee agreed, on a 9 to 3 vote,
that the NIH could permit use of genetic therapies in emergency cases. The
agency still would have to justify its action to the committee.

   The NIH, in the wake of the San Diego brain tumor case, is expected to get
hundreds, perhaps thousands, of single-use requests for genetic treatments.

   The advisory committee clearly didn't savor its position. Members worry about
what could happen if a genetic experiment runs amok. They also fear being
branded as bureaucratic beasts, deaf to the dying who beg for one last hope.

   "The media had something of a field day with the 'NIH bureaucrats' preventing
compassionate treatment of a patient with brain cancer," said Dr.  Donald
Krogstad, a member of the committee and professor at the Tulane University
Medical Center.

   Committee member Robert Haselkorn, professor of molecular genetics at the
University of Chicago, criticized the researchers treating the San Diego woman,
whose identity has been kept private.

   "The award for cruelty, in the case we were asked to consider, goes to the
investigators," Haselkorn said. "They must be aware, deep in their hearts, that
the 'therapy' they offer is not a therapy, not an immunization. Are they unable
to acknowledge the possibility that their procedure is not of greater benefit
than acupuncture or a quack nostrum?"

   Abbey Meyers, another committee member, worried aloud about what could happen
with a poorly controlled genetic experiment.

   "With gene therapy, we have absolutely no idea," said Meyers, executive
director of the National Organization for Rare Disorders. "It could harm the
patient, it could harm the health-care workers."

   She said a genetically altered substance injected in a human could even
strike the next generation.

   The San Diego woman's doctor, Ivor Royston, scientific director at the San
Diego Regional Cancer Center, rejected criticism of his methods, but would not
comment on his patient's condition.

   "She's undergoing tests today," Royston said.

   Royston and his colleague, Dr. Robert Sobol, injected the 51-year-old woman
with her own cells that were altered to contain a gene for interleukin 2, a
protein which is believed to attract added quantities of the immune system's
cytotoxic T cells. According to the theory, those added T cells would circulate
in the brain and attack the tumor.

   She would receive progressively larger injections every two weeks and would
be able to stay at home, the doctors said.

   Royston also received approval from the Food and Drug Administration for the
"compassionate use" of experimental therapy. The FDA has become more aggressive
in recent years about considering and granting such requests from patients with
AIDS or cancer, for whom other therapies have failed.

   Because genetics is such a new field, the NIH does not have a mechanism for
allowing an individual to receive genetic therapy on a compassionate basis.

   FDA's approval of using an experimental drug is legally required. NIH's
approval is needed if the doctors or their universities want to continue
receiving research grants from the FDA.

LOAD-DATE: May 17, 1993


                             1279 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1993 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           January 14, 1993 Thursday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-1:4,8,9; B-2:3,7; B-3:1,6

LENGTH: 582 words

HEADLINE: Panel to weigh rules for unproven gene therapy

BYLINE: DAVID GRAHAM, Staff Writer

BODY:

   When a federal panel convenes in Maryland today to consider when to allow
"compassionate use" exemptions for unproven gene therapies, the discussion is
expected to turn also to the case of the La Jolla physicians whose request
forced the issue. Drs. Ivor Royston and Robert Sobol of the San Diego Regional
Cancer Center were the first in the country to be given special permission to
use an unproven gene therapy, in this instance to treat a San Diego woman dying
of a brain tumor.

   The permission came, however, from the director of the National Institutes of
Health -- outside the established procedures for approving gene therapy, and
following a lobbying effort by the doctors and the patient's family. Today's
emergency meeting of the NIH's Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee was called to
establish a procedure for considering compassionate-use requests by which future
inquiries can be judged.

   The committee is the body which is supposed to review and approve
gene-therapy procedures before they begin. Approval from the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration also is required. At the time Royston petitioned the NIH's
director, Dr. Bernadine Healy, in December, individual committee members
questioned the wisdom of allowing the use of a treatment that had not been
proved in laboratory experiments to be effective.

   The committee itself never considered the doctors' request for an exemption.
A San Diego member of the committee, UCSD molecular biologist E. Peter
Geiduschek, said the approval given Royston was premature and was apparently the
result of political interventions within the federal government that would be
unavailable to most people. "Is it possible to think otherwise?"

   Geiduschek said. The dying woman, 51, is married to a San Diego businessman
who has connections through past service to the federal government.

   The patient is not being identified in this story to preserve her privacy.
After an inquiry initiated by the family, U.S. Sen. Tom Harkin of Iowa wrote a
letter to Healy asking that some compassionate exemption be considered.

   The family also lobbied senior officials of the Department of Health and
Human Services, which oversees the NIH, to urge Healy to grant permission, the
husband has said. "This is as far from equal-access medicine as it is possible
to get," Geiduschek said, adding that he expects the issue to be discussed more
fully in the meeting. Royston said he plans to attend the meeting.

   The husband hopes to speak to the group. On Jan. 4, the patient was injected
with cells altered to contain a gene that the physicians hope will stimulate an
immune response against the tumor. The gene produces interleukin 2, a protein
that Royston said proved useful in attracting the immune system's T-cells to
attack some tumors in animal studies.

   But none of the studies showed any evidence the therapy would work against
brain tumors, he acknowledges. Nonetheless, Royston contended in his plea for an
exemption that even the most remote chance of benefit is worth a try when a
patient will die anyway. The woman previously had been treated with
chemotherapy, radiation and surgery, but those did not eliminate the brain
tumor, which is of a type that is almost always fatal. Members of the committee
have said that before compassionate use is allowed, it is important to have
evidence a gene-therapy treatment might work.

   They also say the risk of emotional, financial and even physical harm to a
patient from a treatment that is unproven should be considered.

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                             1280 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                    January 13, 1993 Wednesday, FIRST / WEST

SECTION: G; Pg. 2G

LENGTH: 588 words

HEADLINE: GENETICALLY ENGINEERED MOUSE MIGHTY BIG WITH OHIO U. CREATORS

BYLINE: SCRIPPS HOWARD; ATHENS, O.

BODY:

   On the outside, the tiny creature looks no different than any other
laboratory mouse.

   On the inside - at the level of cells and molecules - this mouse is radically
different.

   The mouse's genetic structure was altered before birth - while it still was
an embryo - and carries a gene that both produces the human protein interferon
and makes it resistant to viruses.

   In many ways, this genetically engineered mighty mouse is a man-made
creature. It is so different that its creators, two Ohio University scientists,
sought five years ago to protect it with a patent. On Dec. 29, the U.S. Patent
and Trademark Office issued a patent for that strain of mice, as well as for
mice produced by Harvard University and a California biotechnology firm.

   They were the first patents issued for living forms since 1988, when the
government granted the first such patent to Harvard.

   After that first mouse patent, ethical, moral, religious and environmental
arguments raged. Some said it would change the laws of nature, would harm
animals and meddle in the divine order of things. Those debates started anew
after the newest patents were issued just two weeks ago, placing Ohio University
- and Ohio - among the leaders in the emerging field of biotechnology.

   Carl Pinkert, a University of Alabama biologist and editor of the journal
Transgenic Research, said, "The issuance of another animal patent is an
important, necessary step in the evolution of this technology. The doors are
going to open to more research."

   The Ohio University mouse was engineered at the school's Edison Animal
Biotechnology Center, part of a consortium of Edison Centers in the state that
develop new technology.

   The special protein it contains, interferon, occurs naturally in the bodies
of human beings and other mammals, fighting viral infections and the growth of
tumor cells. It has been tested against immune deficiency diseases such as AIDS.

   Researchers use a microsurgical process to inject the foreign gene into the
mouse embryo shortly after it is fertilized. The fertilized egg with the new
gene is then implanted back into the mouse mother. When the pups are born, they
are tested to see which carries the new gene. When the pups mature and mate,
their offspring carry the new gene. The altered animal is called a transgenic
mouse.

   A recent study of the state's Edison centers commissioned by the Ohio
Department of Development criticized the Animal Biotechnology Center for being
essentially a department of Ohio University and not doing enough to turn its
research into commercial ventures that could benefit companies in Southeast
Ohio.

   One of the more practical applications of the new mice will be to market them
as laboratory mice that are healthier and more resistant to the viruses and
other illnesses that plague the creatures.

   "There's a giant market for laboratory mice," said David Allen, acting
director of the biotechnology center. "It's clearly in the hundreds of millions
of dollars."

   Genetically altering mice also holds great potential for humans. By changing
their genetic structures so they carry genes that cause disease, scientists can
test new drugs on them.

   The ultimate goal of genetic research is to treat humans with gene therapy.

   Inserting genes into the cells of human beings could treat a score of genetic
diseases. Scientists expect several common, inherited diseases, including
diabetes, Alzheimer's, cystic fibrosis and musclar dysrophy, to be among the
first to be treated with gene therapy.

LOAD-DATE: February 5, 1993


                             1281 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                     January 12, 1993 Tuesday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: HEALTH & SCIENCE; Pg. 6F

LENGTH: 1139 words

HEADLINE: HEALTH CARE FUTURE ROSIER;
GREATER ACCESS AND MORE ADVANCES

BYLINE: By SHARI ROAN; LOS ANGELES TIMES

BODY:

   Medicine gets better every year. Discoveries are made. Treatments are
refined. Research goes on. But as discoveries have multiplied, the pool of
Americans able to take advantage of them has decreased. Fewer people can afford
basic health care.

   In 1993, more people should have access to health care as reforms are ushered
in under the Clinton administration. Greater access will be the big health news
this year, experts say. But there is much more to watch for.

   Here's a look ahead:

   For several reasons, 1993 will be the year of the prostate. The prostate
specific antigen test - a blood test that can indicate the presence of cancer -
is expected to see wider use, and make more men willing to be screened. The test
is more accurate and less invasive than a rectal examination, and can detect the
cancer at an earlier stage.

   The debate over prostate cancer treatment will even out as consensus is
reached on when to recommend surgery, radiation, chemotherapy or other hormonal
treatments. At the same time, advances in understanding prostate cancer will
surface, including indications that the disease is caused by hormones. Hopes are
placed on the drug Proscar.

   The good news in the fight against infectious diseases will be the explosion
in the field of immunizations. Expect the long-awaited vaccine for chicken pox,
the varicella zoster vaccine, to be approved. In addition, combination vaccines
will become more common - such as doses of DTP (diphtheria, tetanus, pertussis),
haemophilus type b (which causes meningitis) and, possibly, influenza in one
shot.

   In 1993 and beyond, we'll see many new screening tests and treatments based
on genetics, because the Human Genome Project, a decades-long effort to map
human genetic structure, is ahead of schedule.

   For example, a prenatal screening test for cystic fibrosis is available on a
limited basis, and the government may recommend that it be offered to all
pregnant women. It's also likely that the first gene therapy experiments for
cystic fibrosis will begin early this year; three groups have received approval
for such therapy.

   Advances in molecular sciences also will lead to a prenatal screening test
for all hereditary diseases: a simple blood test that analyzes the small
quantities of fetal blood cells in the mother's bloodstream. This test will
become available in the next two or three years.

   After a year of focusing on the major killers of women - such as breast
cancer and heart disease - the research spotlight will shift to often-ignored
chronic, painful women's diseases, including interstitial cystitis,
endometriosis and fibroid tumors.

   Mental health providers will turn activist in 1993, and a unified effort will
be made by providers and consumer organizations to push for mental health
benefits in all health plans.

   Group therapy, which began in the 1940s to help soldiers adjust to postwar
life, will re-emerge as a means to lower the costs of mental health therapy.
The practice boomed in the late 1960s and is still popular in inpatient hospital
treatment, but has dwindled elsewhere.

   Research on the "abortion pill," RU-486, as well as on fetal tissue will
resume in the United States, although under tight controls. The hot areas of
research will be the use of RU-486 for treatment of benign meningiomas (tumors
that line the brain and spinal cord), while fetal tissue research shows promise
for treatment of Parkinson's disease.

   Officials will strongly emphasize the prevention of injuries, especially in
the workplace. Injuries are a major cause of the nation's astronomical health
care bill.

   A total of 6.3 million occupational illnesses and injuries occurred in 1991,
resulting in the highest number of lost workdays ever - 60 million.  These
statistics have prompted an outcry for a stronger federal Occupational Safety
and Health Act, and legislation to strengthen OSHA will surface this month in
Washington.

   The return of tuberculosis to frightening proportions is a signal that
infectious diseases remain a threat. Look for the continued rise of TB cases to
provoke intense debate for stronger preventive measures. The debate will surface
on whether mandatory quarantine may be a needed last resort for patients who
either won't or can't take TB medication.

   An anti-arthritic drug, naproxen, could move from prescription to
over-the-counter status, while government officials scrutinize whether to make
other medications over-the-counter in the next several years. Included in the
latter group will be non-sedating antihistamines, ulcer drugs like Tagamet,
tobacco deterrents, and drugs to control blood pressure and lower cholesterol.

   A drug to curb craving in alcoholics, called naltrexone, will soon become
widely used, and other drugs to curb addictions will become available later in
the decade. The first drug specifically approved for treatment of wrinkles, a
form of Retin-A with moisturizer called Renova, will be approved.

   Perhaps the biggest developments in health care this year, however, will be
in economics.

   In electing Bill Clinton to the presidency, voters backed the concept of a
new system of health care that would include all Americans.

   But some suggest that Clinton's restructuring of health care, at least in the
first year or two, will be modest, focusing on reducing costs and ensuring
minimum care for all.

   "It's clear that there will be some kind of health reform in 1993. The
question for me is how visionary that will be," says Clement Bezold, executive
director of the Institute for Alternative Futures, an Alexandria, Va., think
tank for health issues. "We need access to health care for the uninsured. But we
also need to reinvent the health care system.

   Overall, it is hoped that most people will have, at the least, a basic health
benefits package coming from a variety of funding sources, such as government
and employers. But the more visionary changes will take longer.  Eventually,
there will be more access to preventive care.

   Americans will notice other, subtle shifts in health care. Employers will
focus more on managed-care health plans for their employees, forcing more people
to give up longtime doctors and find new ones.

   Learn this term: outcome data. It will be a watchword for health care in the
'90s. Using the data involves compiling statistics that will tell consumers,
insurers, government and doctors how well certain treatments work and at what
costs. When, for example, a proposed National Outcomes Database is established,
doctors would list each treatment and how the patient fared, then use the
database to make treatment decisions. Thus, they will refer more to guidelines
in treating patients rather than relying on instinct.

   Says Bezold: "In the '90s, we'll have the ability to compare our physician
with all the other physicians in town."

LOAD-DATE: February 5, 1993


                             1282 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1993 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times



                  January 11, 1993, MONDAY , LATE SPORTS FINAL

SECTION: MEDLIFE; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 751 words

HEADLINE: '93 Will See Significant Gains In Health Care for Americans

BYLINE: Shari Roan

BODY:


   Medicine gets better every year. Discoveries are made. Treatments are
refined. Research goes on. But as discoveries have multiplied, the pool of
Americans able to take advantage of them has decreased. Fewer people can afford
basic health care. In 1993, more people should have access to health care as
reforms are ushered in under the Clinton administration. Greater access will be
the big health news this year, experts say. But there is much more to watch for.
Here's a look ahead.

   The good news in the fight against infectious diseases will be the explosion
in the field of immunizations. Expect the long-awaited vaccine for chicken pox,
the varicella zoster vaccine, to be approved. In addition, combination vaccines
will become more common - such as doses of DTP (diphtheria, tetanus, pertussis),
haemophilus type b (which causes meningitis) and, possibly, influenza in one
shot.

   For several reasons, 1993 will be the year of the prostate. The prostate
specific antigen test, a blood test that can indicate the presence of cancer, is
expected to see wider use and to make more men willing to be screened. The test
is more accurate and less invasive than a rectal examination and can detect the
cancer at an earlier stage.

   The debate over prostate cancer treatment will even out as consensus is
reached on when to recommend surgery, radiation, chemotherapy or other hormonal
treatments. At the same time, advances in understanding prostate cancer will
surface, including indications that the disease is caused by hormones. Hopes are
placed on the drug Proscar.

   Mental health providers will turn activist in 1993, and a unified effort will
be made by providers and consumer organizations to push for mental health
benefits in all health plans.

   Group therapy, which began in the 1940s to help soldiers adjust to postwar
life, will re-emerge as a means to lower the costs of mental health therapy.

   After a year of focusing on the major killers of women, such as breast cancer
and heart disease, the research spotlight will shift to often-ignored chronic,
painful women's diseases, including interstitial cystitis, endometriosis and
fibroid tumors.

   The return of tuberculosis to frightening proportions is a signal that
infectious diseases remain a threat. Look for the continued rise of TB cases to
provoke intense debate for stronger preventive measures. The debate will surface
on whether mandatory quarantine may be a needed last resort for patients who
either won't or can't take TB medication.

   In 1993 and beyond, we'll see many new screening tests and treatments based
on genetics, because the Human Genome project, a decades-long effort to map
human genetic structure, is ahead of schedule.

   For example, a prenatal screening test for cystic fibrosis is available on a
limited basis, and the government may recommend that it be offered to all
pregnant women. It's also likely that the first gene therapy experiments for
cystic fibrosis will begin early this year.

   Perhaps the biggest developments in health care this year, however, will be
in economics.

   In electing Bill Clinton to the presidency, voters backed the concept of a
new system of health care that would include all Americans. But many experts
suggest that Clinton's restructuring of health care, at least in the first year
or two, will be modest, focusing on reducing costs and ensuring that everyone
receives minimum care.

   "It's clear that there will be some kind of health reform in 1993. The
question for me is how visionary that will be," says Clement Bezold, executive
director of the Institute for Alternative Futures, an Alexandria, Va., think
tank for health issues. "We need access to health care for the uninsured. But we
also need to reinvent the health care system. There is a lot of talk about the
first, but not a lot of talk about the second."

   Overall, it is hoped that most people will have, at the least, a basic health
benefits package coming from a variety of funding sources, such as government
and employers. But the more visionary changes will take longer. Eventually,
access to preventive care will be a larger part of the picture.

   Research on the "abortion pill," RU486, as well as on fetal tissue will
resume in the United States, although under tight controls. The hot areas of
research will be the use of RU486 for treatment of benign meningiomas (tumors
that line the brain and spinal cord) while fetal tissue research shows promise
for treatment of Parkinson's disease.

GRAPHIC: Los Angeles Times

LOAD-DATE: January 31, 1993


                             1283 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1993 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                     January 11, 1993, Monday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 1; Column 1; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 3037 words

HEADLINE: NEW PRESSURES CONFRONT HIGH-TECH MEDICAL CARE;
TRANSPLANTS: PLIGHT OF THE UNINSURED RAISES QUESTIONS FOR L.A. FACILITIES.
COMPETITION HEIGHTENS.

BYLINE: By IRENE WIELAWSKI, TIMES STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   In the rarefied world of organ transplantation, Los Angeles County boasts an
embarrassment of riches.

   Three of its major hospitals -- UCLA Medical Center, Cedars-Sinai Medical
Center and USC University Hospital -- compete fiercely with one another for
preeminence in this prestigious niche. In an effort to attract research grants
and paying patients, they have recruited top specialists and invested millions
of dollars in equipment and laboratory facilities.

   But another sort of embarrassment threatens the hospitals' ambitions: the
medical plight of nearly 3 million Los Angeles County residents without health
insurance.

   The uninsured are prey to illness and death from things most Americans never
have to worry about. Among them were thousands of children in Los Angeles
stricken in the recent measles epidemic. Forty children died. Many of those
deaths, health officials say, could have been prevented with a $15 dose of
vaccine.

   Such tragedies in Los Angeles and elsewhere have brought harsher scrutiny to
high-tech specialties whose stunning accomplishments -- such as the first-ever
pig liver to human transplant at Cedars-Sinai in October -- have attracted
international attention.

   Critics question whether the price of such wizardry is too high. They say
that to support transplant programs, hospitals jack up the costs of other
services, rendering some of them inaccessible to the poor and uninsured. And
they ask whether $150,000 for a liver transplant might be better spent
vaccinating 10,000 inner-city youngsters.

   Now, with funds for all types of health care dwindling in a sagging economy,
transplant surgeons increasingly are forced to wrestle with such questions.

   President-elect Bill Clinton has promised reforms that his policy advisers
say will effectively shift money from high-tech care to basic medical services.
In the meantime, health insurers are putting unprecedented pressure on organ
transplant programs to cut costs and prove their worth.

   All this has dramatically changed the playing field for UCLA Medical Center
and Cedars-Sinai, both established transplant centers, and for USC University
Hospital, whose transplant program is getting under way.

   Mired in a long history of, at times, parochial competition, the hospitals
must find a way to sustain national-level quality with less money. At the same
time, observers say, they will face new pressures to address the medical needs
of the uninsured.

   "We have to overcome history and a lot of arrogance," said Dr. James R.
Klinenberg, Cedars-Sinai's senior vice president for research. "It's not a
question of (which transplant program) has a right to exist, but how can we
coexist in a way that benefits the community."

First Transplant in 1954

   Transplant medicine is a relatively new science, dating back to the first
successful kidney transplant between identical twins in 1954.

   Over the years, hearts, lungs and livers have joined the list of
transplantable solid organs, as well as combinations such as heart-lung and
pancreas-kidney. New drugs to counteract the body's natural rejection of foreign
tissue permitted thousands of patients to benefit from this remarkable surgery.

   From the beginning, though, organ transplants have been extraordinarily
expensive. In addition to the operation itself, transplant patients require
intensive care, blood transfusions, extensive laboratory tests and costly
anti-rejection drugs.

   Liver transplants today go for upward of $150,000, lungs can be $135,000 or
more, hearts hover around $100,000 and kidneys are $40,000 to $50,000.
Complications with any of them can easily drive the bill over $200,000.

   The prices leave most people aghast, said Ellen Severoni, whose research
group, California Health Decisions, monitors public opinion on health care
issues. The vast majority of those she has surveyed believe this sort of
high-tech medicine is a major cause of our nation's runaway health costs.

   What the public fails to see, transplant surgeons contend, is the long-term
savings the transplant cures may offer. A successful kidney transplant pays for
itself within five years through savings on weekly dialysis treatment and
complications of the condition. That makes it the most cost-effective treatment
for end-stage kidney disease, said UCLA kidney expert Dr. J. Thomas Rosenthal.

   He rejects as bogus any connection between transplants and the health care
system's money woes. Americans need the full range of medical services,
transplants as well as vaccines, Rosenthal said. It is senseless to blame one
niche of medicine for the failures in another, he said.

   But critics use a more global cost-benefit analysis to make exactly that
case.

   When UCLA Medical Center, Cedars-Sinai and USC University Hospital choose to
pursue costly therapies benefiting relatively few patients, they siphon
resources from areas of greater need in the community, such as immunization,
these critics say.

   The contrast between the haves and have-nots in health care is particularly
sharp in Los Angeles County, where one-third of the population lacks health
insurance -- a higher proportion than in any other metropolitan area in the
nation.

   "Los Angeles is a living, breathing, hyper example of what is wrong with the
American health care system," said Arthur Caplan, director of the Center for
Biomedical Ethics at the University of Minnesota. "You've got too many children
who can't get a leg up on life, because their prenatal care stinks, they can't
get a measles vaccine, or their diabetes goes unchecked for too long."

   Yet in its major hospitals, Caplan added, the city offers some of the finest
medical care in the world -- "if you have money. Then you can have pig liver
transplants, gene therapy, anything you want."

   Indeed, money is why some hospitals go into the transplant business, health
economists say.

   Although a program's start-up costs can be considerable, transplant centers
historically have been well paid by insurers. Hospitals also see potential
profits in the prestige such programs confer.

   Hospital consultant Marian Jennings says many of her clients want transplant
programs because they consider them a lure for medical talent as well as for
patients who might be impressed by this badge of cutting-edge sophistication.

   The burgeoning popularity of these programs is seen in statistics kept by the
United Network for Organ Sharing, the federally mandated watchdog agency for
transplant medicine. In the last five years, the agency has measured a 39%
increase in heart transplant centers in the United States, while liver programs
have leaped 70%.

   The one thing that has not increased is the supply of donor organs -- a
problem with grave implications for the quality of transplant medicine, should
the proliferation of centers continue. Some transplant experts believe there
already are too many.

   The more organ transplants a hospital does, the better chance the patient has
of surviving, studies show. But with more transplant centers competing for a
limited supply of organs, expertise can only be diluted, said Dr. Douglas J.
Norman. incoming president of the United Network for Organ Sharing.

   Perhaps nowhere in the country are the medical and ethical problems of
proliferating transplant centers more apparent than in Los Angeles. They are
compounded by the politics of competition among two medical schools and three
hospitals, all vying for insured local patients and national recognition.

   As the relative newcomer, USC University Hospital has endured some icy blasts
from its Westside rivals, Cedars-Sinai and UCLA Medical Center, where officials
have grumbled about yet another transplant program in Los Angeles. USC also
stepped on sensitive toes when it tried to lure Cedars-Sinai's liver transplant
specialist, Dr. Leonard Makowka, and UCLA's heart transplant specialist, Dr.
Hillel Laks.

   But UCLA Medical Center and Cedars-Sinai are not exactly collegial, despite
their common ties to UCLA's medical school.

   UCLA Medical Center, which ranks second among hospitals nationally in volume
of heart and liver transplants, last summer grabbed the chief of Cedars-Sinai's
lung transplant program, Dr. Paul Waters, who now directs the specialty at UCLA.

   And, though they operate within a few miles of each other and are both
professors at UCLA, Cedars-Sinai's Makowka and UCLA Medical Center's Dr. Ronald
Busuttil head up competing liver transplant programs.

   Hospital and university officials acknowledge that money could be saved and
patients could benefit by closer cooperation between these programs. But the
drive of each hospital to ensure its economic survival has sabotaged these
efforts as, in some cases, have egos of program leaders, officials say.

   "It always gets down to the same issues of power: Who is going to control?"
said Cedars-Sinai's Klinenberg, who in addition to his duties at the hospital is
an assistant dean at the medical school. Cedars-Sinai performed its first kidney
transplant in 1965 and added hearts and lungs in 1988, livers in 1989.

   "There is no effort to organize anything on behalf of the community," said
Dr. Michael Zinner, chief of surgery at both the university medical school and
UCLA Medical Center. Both Klinenberg and Zinner say they and administrators of
both hospitals have begun monthly meetings to foster closer ties.

   Zinner blames California's unregulated health care economy for pitting
hospital against hospital in a fight for insured -- and therefore, profitable --
patients. Unlike states where so-called "certificate of need" laws require
hospitals to prove community need before they can launch a costly new program,
California has effectively discouraged such joint planning, Zinner said, by
letting hospitals decide for themselves what services to offer.

   The hospitals naturally gravitate toward moneymaking ventures. Transplant
medicine has been one of them -- so long as hospitals pick paying patients to
receive the limited supply of donor organs.

   "If (a patient) is uninsured and unemployed, he's got a problem," UCLA's
Busuttil said bluntly.

   The expensive competition that results, however, burdens far more than the
institutions involved, critics say.

   E. Richard Brown, a professor of public health at UCLA, said patients
subsidize these costly and duplicative programs either directly through higher
payments for routine medical services, or indirectly through taxpayer supported
health insurance programs such as Medicare and Medicaid (called Medi-Cal in
California). And because having insurance coverage is often a prerequisite for
transplant surgery, some of those whose tax dollars subsidize these services
will never be able to benefit from them.

   "It is a wonderful sort of microcosm for what ails the American health care
system," said Dr. Robert Tranquada, former dean of the medical school at USC and
chairman of Los Angeles County's Task Force for Health Care Access. "There is
money to do this kind of thing. And there isn't money to address the basic
health care needs of the uninsured."

   Clinton's election has been interpreted as a mandate to correct these
inequities. And his remarks to date -- touting "managed competition" over the
free-wheeling health care market of the 1980s -- presage a change in economic
incentives for hospitals.

   Marilyn Moon, a health economist at the Washington-based Urban Institute and
an adviser to the Clinton transition team, said the change inevitably will favor
"primary care," such as immunizations, over high-tech medicine, such as
transplants.

   That means government money for transplant research will be less available to
UCLA Medical Center, Cedars-Sinai and USC University Hospital. And insurance
money, both from government programs and private companies, will be tighter too
-- the result, experts say, of industry efforts to prove it can spend health
dollars wisely.

   "There is no doubt that the payer community is exerting its muscle," said Dr.
Steven Udvarhelyi of the Prudential Insurance Co., one of the nation's largest
private purchasers of medical services. "We have to ask ourselves as a country
whether there are too many of these (transplant) centers, and whether there
ought to be some consolidation."

   Prudential has been in the vanguard of the insurance industry's shift to
"selective contracting" for organ transplants and other expensive treatments.
Because transplant surgery is difficult, and because the consequences of poor
work can add tens of thousands of dollars to a patient's bill, Prudential and
others say they are buying the service only from hospitals with good track
records.

Survival Rates Emphasized

   The concept originated with the federal government's Medicare program. Ron
Milhorn, an analyst for the U.S. Health Care Financing Administration, said it
has proven to be "one of the most successful things" Medicare has done to curb
costs and assure medical quality. For Medicare approval, hospitals must have
one-year survival rates of at least 73% for heart transplant patients and 77%
for liver patients. They must also have at least two years experience and
perform at least 12 heart or liver transplants in each of those years.

   In California, Blue Cross, Blue Shield, Kaiser Permanente and the state's
Medi-Cal program have all embraced selective contracting for organ transplants.
The insurers say they will not contract with hospitals that do not meet their
standards of quality and experience in performing transplants. They predict they
will use fewer hospitals as tougher national standards emerge for transplant
medicine.

   Blue Cross of California is paring its hospital list. Dr. David Chernof, the
company's medical director, said the current list emphasizes geographic
convenience for the patient as well as quality. The new list will be based
entirely on quality, and hospitals will have to re-qualify for inclusion every
year -- a policy many insurers are adopting.

   Chernof believes the policy change will help steer patients to good programs
and squeeze duplicative ones out of the health care system. In theory, it should
free money for hospital- or community-based services that address unmet medical
needs, such as immunization. Yet Chernof is also implementing the policy with
some chagrin, knowing well what is at stake for local institutions.

   "We have two teaching programs (UCLA and USC) who would feel second-class if
they didn't have a transplant program, plus the biggest and most prestigious
private hospital (Cedars-Sinai) in the western United States," Chernof said.
"How are you going to deal with that? What are you going to say -- 'Go fly a
kite?' "

   Perhaps not in those words, but experts say some transplant centers will not
survive the economic squeeze.

   While Blue Cross ups the competitive ante, California's Kaiser Permanente is
pushing down fees. It has structured deals with UCLA Medical Center and others
on its contract list that pay them only for the surgery, allowing Kaiser to tend
to patients' pre-surgical and follow-up care in its own, lower-cost hospitals
and clinics. The result is thousands of dollars less for transplant centers for
each Kaiser case.

   Insurers also are getting tougher about paying for medical complications,
forcing transplant surgeons and hospitals to take the loss on recovery delays
and repeat surgery.

   It all adds up to much shakier financial footing than UCLA Medical Center and
Cedars-Sinai enjoyed when they expanded their transplant programs in the 1980s,
and when USC University Hospital launched its ambitions in the field.

   Each is scrambling to adapt to the rapidly changing rules. Each also
acknowledges that while the competition for survival is a national one, they
cannot ignore the plight of the medically underserved at home.

   "We have to recognize that it's a brave new world out there and we have to do
things differently," said Cedars-Sinai's Klinenberg.

Buying Transplants

    Health insurers, relying on tougher quality standards for organ transplants,
are becoming more selective about which hospitals they will pay for these
difficult and costly procedures. Here are the California hospitals chosen by the
government's Medicare and Medi-Cal programs, and by some major private insurance
plans, listed according to the number of contracts their transplant programs
have won.
             HOSPITAL              MEDICARE  MEDI-CAL  PRUDENTIAL
Stanford University Hospital,          Heart     Heart       Heart
Palo Alto
                                                              Lung
                                                        Heart/Lung
California Pacific Medical Center      Heart     Heart       Heart
San Francisco
                                       Liver     Liver
UCLA Medical Center                    Heart     Heart
Los Angeles
                                       Liver     Liver
UC San Francisco                       Heart     Heart
San Francisco                          Liver     Liver       Liver
                                                            Kidney
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center            Heart
Los Angeles                            Liver
Loma Linda Medical Center                       Heart*
Loma Linda
Sharp Mem. Hosp., San Diego            Heart     Heart
St. Vincent Medical Ctr., L.A.                              Kidney
Sutter Memorial Hosp., Sacramento                Heart

               HOSPITAL                  KAISER    BLUE CROSS  BLUE SHIELD
Stanford University Hospital,                Heart       Heart        Heart
Palo Alto                                   Kidney
                                              Lung        Lung         Lung
                                        Heart/Lung  Heart/Lung   Heart/Lung
California Pacific Medical Center            Heart       Heart        Heart
San Francisco                               Kidney      Kidney
                                             Liver       Liver        Liver
UCLA Medical Center                          Heart       Heart        Heart
Los Angeles                                 Kidney
                                             Liver       Liver        Liver
                                                    Heart/Lung
UC San Francisco                                                      Heart
San Francisco                                Liver       Liver        Liver
                                            Kidney
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center                              Heart        Heart
Los Angeles                                  Liver       Liver        Liver
                                                          Lung         Lung
                                                    Heart/Lung
UC San Diego Medical Center                  Heart                    Heart
San Diego                                     Lung        Lung
                                        Heart/Lung  Heart/Lung
Loma Linda Medical Center                   Heart*      Heart*       Heart*
Loma Linda                                  Kidney
Sharp Mem. Hosp., San Diego                              Heart        Heart
St. Vincent Medical Ctr., L.A.                                        Heart
Sutter Memorial Hosp., Sacramento                                     Heart
Hoag Memorial Hospital, Newport Beach                                 Heart
UC Irvine Medical Center, Orange                                      Heart
Scripps Memorial Hospital, La Jolla                                   Liver
UC Davis Medical Center, Sacramento         Kidney
Alta Bates Medical Center, Berkeley         Kidney

* pediatric cases only

GRAPHIC: Photo, UCLA Medical Center, left, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center and USC
University Hospital, shortly before its opening in 1991. All have transplant
centers in a climate that is decreasingly favorable for the costly operations.
Los Angeles Times; Table, Buying Transplants


                             1284 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                 January 11, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section D; Page 1; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 551 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS DIGEST

BODY:


   The Economy

   A tax cut for the middle class might have to be delayed because of the
soaring Federal budget deficit, three Democratic Congressional leaders said.
[Page A1.]

   The glass ceiling for women in economics is rather thick. Only a handful are
tenured professors at the nation's top-ranked universities, and men dominate the
field. [D1.]

    Longer-term interest rates are coming under upward pressure again as
investors and traders seem to be focusing on the uncertainity over the coming
change in the White House. [D1.]

Companies

   Sunbeam-Oster unexpectedly dismissed its chairman, Paul B. Kazarian. "It's
absolutely shocking," said Andrew Shore, an analyst at Paine Webber. [D1.]

   Russia's collapsing economy has given U.S. corporations the resource of
world-class scientists at discount rates. A.T.& T. Bell Labs, for example,
temporarily hired two researchers for about $11 a month each. [D1.]

   The F.D.A. hopes to slash its drug-review process further, after approving
four priority products in less than eight months. [D2.]

   Tandy plans to spin off its manufacturing operations to shareholders and
reorganize its retailing operations. [D3.]

   Two fledgling biotech companies plan to team up with established concerns to
pursue new therapies for blood problems. [D3.]

   A venture of National Semiconductor and Defense Software, led by a former
I.B.M. executive, will be based in Israel. [D3.]

The Media Business

   Clinton's inauguration week will have more TV coverage than any previous
Presidential inauguration, and for the first time, two cable entertainment
channels will join the traditional news coverage of the event. Bill Carter:
Television. [D1.]

   The Harvard Business Review seems to make as many waves with the machinations
of its editorial and business staff as with the material printed between its
covers. [D1.]

   Is the top of a U.S. masthead next for Alexandra Schulman, the editor of
British Vogue? [D6.]

   These are turbulent times at Fox Broadcasting, a message that came through on
Friday. [D6.]

   Bantam has had heroic results with Gen. Schwarzkopf's book, "It Doesn't Take
a Hero." [D6.]

   The supermarket checkout counter is the target zone for marketers hoping to
perfect the electronic cents-off coupon. Stuart Elliott: Advertising. [D7.]

International

   Fidel Castro stands fast against the winds that have blown away most of the
Communist world, along with its subsidies for Cuba and its markets for Cuban
goods. [A1.]

Today's Columns

   It could be a big step forward for gene therapy: a way to produce large
quantities of a virus that can be used to "infect" patients with the genes they
need to fight illnesses like cystic fibrosis. Edmund L. Andrews: Patents. [D2.]

   The cops are at a disadvantage in the land of securities cops and robbers.
Floyd Norris: Market Place. [D4.]

The New Stock Tables

   The Times has introduced new stock market tables to improve legibility and
provide additional information about trading volume and price changes. The new
tables use some abbreviations that differ from those formerly used.

   Readers who need assistance in finding stocks, or in understanding the new
tables, may call (212) 556-5899, which will be answered from 9 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Sunday through Friday.

LOAD-DATE: January 11, 1993


                             1285 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                 January 11, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section D; Page 3; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 540 words

HEADLINE: Amgen and Miles Sign Small Biotech Concerns

BYLINE: By LAWRENCE M. FISHER,  Special to The New York Times

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO, Jan. 10

BODY:

   Two fledgling biotechnology companies are planning to announce collaborations
this week with established concerns to pursue new therapies for blood
deficiencies. The deals are typical of recent strategic links between large
pharmaceutical or biotechnology corporations with cash and smaller companies
with promising science.

   On Monday, Amgen Inc., the largest biotech company, is scheduled to announce
an alliance with Sugen Inc. to develop drugs using Sugen's work with
drug-discovery techniques involving so-called receptors on human cells. As part
of the four-year collaboration, Amgen has purchased a 10 percent stake in Sugen,
which is privately held. Sources close to the deal said the price was about $10
million.

    The announcement of the alliance is planned for the Hambrecht & Quist Life
Science Conference, an annual event where biotech companies make presentations
to analysts and industry experts, to be held here this week. On Wednesday at the
conference, Viagene Inc. and Miles Inc. are scheduled to declare their own
collaboration to develop a gene therapy product for treatment of Hemophilia A, a
blood disorder characterized by the lack of a protein that causes clotting.
Under the terms of the agreement, Miles would provide as much as $9 million up
front, research support and additional payments as certain research milestones
are met.

   The Amgen-Sugen collaboration is to focus primarily on a compound to
stimulate the production of platelets, a key blood component that is sometimes
deficient following chemotherapy or immune-system disorders. Such a compound
would complement Amgen's two existing products, Epogen and Neupogen, which
stimulate the production of red and white blood cells, respectively. Drugs
discovered by Sugen, of Redwood City, Calif., would be produced by Amgen, of
Thousand Oaks, Calif., and marketed by both companies.

   Unlike Amgen and other first-generation biotech companies that produced drugs
by cloning naturally occurring therapeutic proteins, Sugen and other new
companies seek to produce drugs by identifying receptors on cells that are
implicated in specific diseases. They then seek to produce molecules with
complementary shapes that can bind with the receptor, thus halting the disease
mechanism.

Blood-Clotting Protein Approved

    The Viagene-Miles alliance follows the approval last month by the Food and
Drug Administration of a genetically engineered version of the blood-clotting
protein Factor VIII, produced by Genetics Institute Inc. and Baxter Hyland.
Miles is also working on a genetically engineered Factor VIII, in a program with
Genentech Inc., which could be approved soon.

   The collaboration with Viagene would explore using retroviral vectors to
treat hemophilia. A retroviral vector uses genetically engineered viruses as a
carrier vehicle to deliver a therapeutic gene into a living cell; the gene then
prompts the production of a desired protein. Viagene, of La Jolla, Calif., would
provide its expertise in the production of retroviral vectors, while Miles, of
Elkhart, Ind., would provide the Factor VIII gene, which it has licensed from
Genentech. Miles would acquire worldwide marketing rights, and Viagene would
gain the right to manufacture.

LOAD-DATE: January 11, 1993


                             1286 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                 January 11, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section D; Page 2; Column 4; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 917 words

HEADLINE: Patents;
Increasing Production Of a Virus

BYLINE: By Edmund L. Andrews

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   IN what could be a big step forward for gene therapy, a small company in
California has patented a way to produce large quantities of a virus that can be
used to "infect" patients with the genes they need to fight illnesses like
cystic fibrosis.

   Viruses are central to gene therapy, the still-nascent science of inserting
bits of DNA into a person to correct genetic defects that lead to particular
disorders. Human tests are already well along on a gene therapy for cystic
fibrosis, and researchers hope it can eventually be used to treat sickle cell
anemia and many other illnesses.

    Typically, part of the DNA in a normal virus is removed and replaced with a
gene that the patient is missing. The viruses then invade the person's cells and
the new gene becomes part of the DNA in each cell.

   The new patent, issued to three scientists at Applied Immune Sciences Inc., a
biotechnology company in Santa Clara, Calif., covers a method for making large
quantities of a virus they believe is ideal for the job.

   The inventors say that the advantage of this strain, known as
adeno-associated virus, or AAV, is that it has never been associated with any
human illnesses. Dr. Jane Lebkowski, senior director of research at Applied
Immune and one of the inventors, said that many of the other viruses now being
used in gene therapy are descended from those that can make a person sick. They
can also replicate in the body far more easily than the AAV, she said, which can
make a therapy difficult to control.

   Up until now, however, AAV has been very hard to produce. Any variant
containing a special gene for medical treatment can be made only in a
genetically engineered line of "producer" cells, but the coding in these cells
degrades within a few days. Thus, the only way to make AAV is to repeatedly
insert DNA for the virus into a new set of producer cells.

   The new method solves that problem, essentially engraving the instructions
needed to replicate the virus and giving the host cells something approaching
immortality. "This is a procedure that lets you scale up with whatever level of
production you want," Dr. Lebkowski said.

   She and two company researchers, Maureen A. McNally and Thomas B. Okarma,
received patent 5,173,414.


Latest Refinement In Gene Splicing

    Splicing human genes into bacteria or animal cells to create living
factories for valuable proteins is now common practice in developing new drugs
and vaccines.

   But now scientists are adding more refinements, inserting genes to add extra
conveniences as gleefully as car makers add options like power windows and
turbochargers.

   The latest refinement comes from Louisiana State University Medical Center: a
gene that essentially orders a cell to gift-wrap proteins so they can be
harvested more easily.

   Invented by John W. Wills, a molecular biologist who has since moved to
Hershey Medical Center at Pennsylvania State University, the new coding is
intended to simplify the job of purifying proteins once they have been produced.
In some cases, the only way to harvest these proteins is to crack open the
genetically engineered cells and then laboriously separate them through
elaborate filtering processes. Or, if the cells are programmed to secrete the
proteins, they get mixed up with the rich nutrients used to feed the cells and
must also be separated through sophisticated processing.

   The new patent covers genetic instructions that cause the cell to encapsulate
the proteins in tiny "buds," made from the same protein as the membrane of the
cell itself. These buds keep the proteins distinct from surrounding nutrients,
making it possible to separate them just by whipping them in a centrifuge.

   The invention -- which has been assigned to Research Corporation
Technologies, a licensing company in Tucson, Ariz. -- will not work on bacteria
or yeast cells, which are used to produce many drugs, but the inventor contends
it does work for any mammalian cells that are being used to produce components
for many vaccines. He received patent 5,175,099.


A New Device For Faster Freezing

    Instacool Inc. of North America, a small company in Rancho Cordova, Calif.,
has patented a new device to freeze anything from blood plasma to food far more
rapidly.

   The advantage of quick-freezing, within a matter of minutes rather than
hours, is that proteins are much less likely to be damaged by the process.
Instacool, a four-year old company with about $2 million in sales from freezers
to chill plasma, has pioneered fast-cooling techniques that use special
low-temperature liquids rather than air.

   Philip H. Coelho, president of Instacool and one of the inventors, said cold
liquids generally soak up heat about 10 times faster than gases. But rapid
cooling requires liquids with freezing points far lower than water, and most of
these leave unacceptable chemical residues on whatever they touch.

   To avoid that problem, Mr. Coelho and a colleague invented a very thin
membrane that lets the cold come through but prevents whatever is being frozen
from touching the liquid. "The material is soft like a latex glove but 100 times
as tough," he said.

   The membrane is already being used in freezers for plasma, and will soon be
incorporated into a line of much bigger freezers used for the bulk storage of
food. Mr. Coelho and a company researcher, Terry Wolf, received patent
5,168,712.
 Patents are available by number for $3 from the Patent and Trademark Office,
Washington, D.C. 20231.


GRAPHIC: Photo: John W. Wills was granted a patent for a gene that essentially
orders a cell to gift-wrap proteins so they can be harvested more easily.
(Research Corporation Technologies)

LOAD-DATE: January 11, 1993


                             1287 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1993 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            January 11, 1993 Monday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-1

LENGTH: 128 words

HEADLINE: SAN DIEGO and CALIFORNIA

BYLINE: Compiled from wire reports

BODY:

   Viagene Inc. has entered into an agreement with Miles Inc. for development of
gene therapy to treat hemophilia.

   The agreement could bring Viagene up to $9 million in upfront payments,
research support and milestone payment over three years.

   Miles will receive worldwide marketing rights to treatments that result from
the collaboration, as well as an option to purchase worldwide manufacturing
rights, which are initially granted to Viagene. Advanced Micro Devices Inc.
reports its sales jumped by 12 percent to more than $400 million in its latest
quarter, pushing revenues to a new high for the year.

   The Sunnyvale company said it earned $69.5 million, or 73 cents a share, in
its fourth quarter ending Dec. 27, compared with $106.7 million, or $1.17 a
share, a year ago.

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                             1288 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                           Times Publishing Company
                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                     January 10, 1993, Sunday, City Edition

SECTION: FLORIDIAN; Pg. 1F

LENGTH: 2377 words

HEADLINE: RACING for a cure

BYLINE: JIM MELVIN

BODY:


   Jon Jantomaso's lungs burn.

   His thighs hurt even worse. They are so knotted he has to run on his toes,
using his calf muscles to propel his body.

   But he continues to run. He can see the finish line. His will forces him
forward.

   Jantomaso's goal is to complete a marathon in less than four hours. His  time
is almost up. Precious seconds tick by. He will succeed or fail with  these
final steps.

   Suddenly, it is over. He stumbles across the line. He looks at the clock.

   (3:59).

   He repeats it to himself.

   Three . . . fifty . . . nine.

   Running 26 miles in less than four hours is enough to impress most people,
but there is more to Jantomaso's story. The 26-year-old Treasure Island man  was
diagnosed with cystic fibrosis, the most common fatal genetic disease in  the
United States, when he was 3 weeks old.

   Many CF sufferers die before they reach the age of 26. Many more are
chronically disabled by that time, their lungs choked with thick mucus. Forget
a marathon; they can't walk up a flight of stairs.

   But Jantomaso is one example of a new outlook in the battle against cystic
fibrosis. The disease remains deadly, killing almost all sufferers by the age
of 40, but medical treatments are vastly improved and the prognosis for a cure
has never been brighter.

   A slew of breakthroughs - most coming in the past three years - has lifted
hopes and extended lives. Scientists have tinkered with the building blocks of
the human body, working toward correcting genetic flaws that once were beyond
our reach.

   If research continues at this pace, a cure for cystic fibrosis could  arrive
before the end of this century. And the knowledge that comes from these
discoveries will lead to advances in the diagnosis and treatment of cancer,
diabetes and muscular dystrophy.

   "I think it's reasonable to say that there are a lot of people working  very
hard to cure this disease and that the progress made recently has been
astounding," says Dr. Ronald Crystal of the National Heart, Lung and Blood
Institute in Bethesda, Md. "The achievements have been remarkable and are
continuing very rapidly."

   Scientists from throughout the world will meet this week at the Innisbrook
Resort in Tarpon Springs to see how far the CF fight has come. Much of the  talk
will be highly technical - genes and cells and viruses, the stuff of  science.
But to the layman, understanding the long, hard fight to cure CF  gives a
revealing glimpse into the complex job of curing a human frailty.

   A brief history of cystic fibrosis helps to bring into focus how far and
fast CF research has advanced.

   It was first identified in the 1930s as a disease causing cysts to form on
the fibrous tissue of the lungs. Effective antibiotics were unavailable at  that
time, and almost all sufferers died in early childhood.

   In 1955, the national Cystic Fibrosis Foundation (CFF) was founded to fund
research that was aimed at improving the quality of life for CF sufferers. But
treatments were still relatively crude and a cure remained a long way off.

   This did not significantly improve until the mid-1970s, when more advanced
methods of diagnosis and treatment allowed many CF patients to survive into
early adult life.

   But in terms of a cure, the first big event occurred in August 1989, when
the specific gene that causes cystic fibrosis was isolated by CFF scientists.
This began a flurry of research by scientists in the United States and
worldwide.

   One discovery led to another - and another. Technological advances that  were
once inconceivable became commonplace. A cure for CF suddenly seemed  within
reach.

   In August 1989, the discoveries of the CF gene and its protein product are
announced by Lap-Chee Tsui, Ph.D., and John Riordan, Ph.D., at the Hospital  for
Sick Children in Toronto; and by Francis Collins, M.D., Ph.D., at the
University of Michigan.

   They name the protein the Cystic Fibrosis Transmembrane Regulator, which is
located in the cell membrane and involves the regulation of the movement of
salt within and between cells (please see related story, 6F).

   "We can finally look into the eyes of the children and young adults with
cystic fibrosis and tell them that the door to their future has been opened,"
says CFF president Robert K. Dresing.

   The discoveries mark the beginning of new phases of CF research involving
genetic engineering.

   Just one year later, two separate teams of scientists are able to correct  CF
cells in laboratory dishes by inserting a normal gene into the defective  cells.
Dresing says that this achievement was expected to take more than a  decade to
accomplish, yet it happens in months. "We're on the right track and  moving
ahead quickly," he says.

   The next step - the one some experts think eventually will lead to a cure -
is to find a way to correct the defective gene within the bodies of humans.
This is far more complex than doing it in a laboratory. Fixing a few cells in  a
glass dish is a long way from correcting millions of them in a living being.

   The major hurdle that scientists must overcome is to develop a safe but
effective method to transfer healthy CF genes into the lung tissues and other
damaged tissues of CF sufferers.

   But research teams have already come up with impressive results. Several
approaches to effective gene transfer are now under study.

   One procedure is to harvest tissues from a patient's lungs, correct the
cells from these tissues outside the body and then transfer the genetically
modified cells back into the lungs.

   But this seems unlikely to work efficiently in the case of cystic fibrosis,
because the airway cells are too numerous to repopulate in this fashion.

   Another approach involves using cold viruses inhaled into the lungs with an
aerosol spray to carry the normal CF gene into the airway cells.

   "We have demonstrated that we can take a normal human cystic fibrosis gene
and transfer it to the airways of living animals by hiding it in an adenovirus
(a scientific term for a cold virus)," says Crystal of the National Heart,
Lung, and Blood Institute. "It acts as a Trojan horse. We manipulate the
adenovirus so that" it cannot cause a cold.

   The adenovirus, by its nature, invades the nucleus of a cell, where it then
reproduces and begins its attack on the host organism. In the case of CF gene
therapy, the virus will be "impotent" in the sense that it will not be able  to
reproduce, but it will be genetically programed to carry healthy cystic
fibrosis genes into the airway cells of the CF sufferer, thereby "curing"  the
patient. The aerosol spray will, in effect, bathe the lung tissues with  the
healthy CF genes.

   Crystal has conducted studies with mice, rats and monkeys that have
indicated his procedure is safe. Studies on human beings will begin this year
at the institute in Bethesda. If it is determined that the procedure is safe
for use on people, it could receive government approval as early as 1994.

   "We'll wait to see how long the correction lasts and how good the  correction
is," says Crystal. "We don't know at this point even what the  dose level is. Or
how often it may need to be repeated."

   Can Crystal's procedure be considered a potential cure for cystic fibrosis?

   "When you use the word cure, you really mean to cure the disease in a way
that people don't die from it, so that people don't have lung disease from  it,"

 says Crystal. "There's no way of gauging how quickly that will be done.  I
can't tell the parent of a CF child that we will soon find a cure, but I can
say that it's rational to believe it will happen. A year from now (after the
studies have been run in Bethesda), we will have a much better feel for that.

   "And we have high hopes!"

   Several other projects using modified viruses and artificial viruses are
under way across the country, including at the University of Florida in
Gainesville. Dr. Arlene Stecenko, an associate professor of pediatrics at UF,
heads up a research group that includes Vanderbilt, Alabama-Birmingham and the
University of Rochester.

   There are other scientists working just as hard at preventing, rather than
curing the disease.

   To contract CF, a child needs to have the defective gene donated by both
mother and father. Often neither parent knows he or she is a carrier before  the
disabled child is born.

   For these people, and also for those who suspect they are carriers because
of their family medical history, there is a recently developed option that  soon
may be available.

   In September 1992, Mark R. Hughes, M.D., Ph.D., of Houston announced the
birth of a healthy baby girl from the parents of CF carriers. The mother had
become pregnant using the now common process called in-vitro fertilization, in
which an egg is surgically removed from the ovary, fertilized (using the
father's sperm) outside the body in a glass dish, and then implanted back into
the mother's uterine wall.

   In-vitro fertilization has been used routinely for years for couples who  are
infertile - more than 10,000 babies have been born by this method since  1978.
But infertility is not the problem for CF carriers; it's the possibility  that
they could give birth to a diseased child.

   But a procedure developed by Hughes, the director of the prenatal genetics
program at the Baylor College of Medicine in Houston, has overcome this
problem.

   Essentially, Hughes interrupts the normal in-vitro fertilization procedure
to test which of the embryos will result in a child with cystic fibrosis. Once
determined to be healthy, the embryo is implanted and CF is avoided.

   Hughes' research is continuing in Houston, but when his procedure is  offered
as routine it will probably add less than $ 2,000 to standard in-vitro  costs,
which now range between $ 5,000 and $ 13,000.

   Research laboratories around the country - including All Children's  Hospital
in St. Petersburg - are now able to routinely screen patients to  determine if
they are carriers of the mutated CF gene. A few drops of blood  are all that are
necessary to conduct the tests.

   Future research on cystic fibrosis will be made easier by the development  of
the first animal model to mimic symptoms of

the human disease. Research conducted by Richard Boucher, M.D., of the
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill has produced mice that develop
cystic fibrosis through birth.

   "This model provides scientists with a critical new tool to develop
treatments for CF," says Dresing of the CFF. "It should also significantly
speed our progress toward the ultimate cure."

   While scientists such as Crystal continue to work on ways to find a cure  for
cystic fibrosis, there are still at least 30,000 people in this country -  many
of whom are young children - who are battling the disease every day.

   There are more than 120 Cystic Fibrosis Foundation care centers nationwide,
including a large operation at All Children's.

   "Any of us who have taken care of CF patients knew that there is a wide
spectrum of how the disease is presented," says Michelle S. Howenstine, M.D.,
of the department of pediatric pulmonology at All Children's. "You could have
40-year-olds with pancreatic problems but minimal respiratory symptoms. You
could have babies die at 3 months of age."

   Howenstine and a team that includes a social worker, respiratory  therapist,
nutritionist and gastroenterologist (digestive specialist) saw 180  CF patients
in 1992, including marathon runner Jon Jantomaso.

   "What Jon points out is that cystic fibrosis is a very diverse disease  that
affects people in a lot of different ways at a lot of different times in  life,"

 says Howenstine. "He has certainly worked very hard at improving his  physical
strength. His family has always had a very positive concept of health  - working
on emphasizing more of the positive than the negative. They're very  religious
and have gotten a lot of strength from that. I'd have to say that of  the
patients I've seen here, that he would have to be in the healthiest top 10
percent.

   "But if Jon didn't have the kind of attitude or the dedication to keeping
himself healthy, he could be very sick, because prevention is very important -
whether that be with daily chest physiotherapy, good nutrition or exercise."

   CF centers such as the one at All Children's are now able to offer a wide
range of therapies to improve the quality of life for cystic fibrosis  patients.
Antibiotics to destroy the bacteria buildup in the lungs are more  diverse and
effective. And new medications are being studied that help to  improve lung
function.

   One drug that appears to be on the verge of governmental approval is called
DNase. It was invented by Dr. Steven Shak, the director of pulmonary research
at Genentech, a biotechnology company in San Francisco that creates and
manufactures human pharmaceuticals.

   When inhaled into the lungs, DNase chops up the thick mucus that clogs the
airways, improving the patient's ability to breathe. It has been tested on
patients around the country, including at All Children's. Many centers have
already reported improvement in lung functions of up to 20 percent.

   "I think it's a positive step," says Howenstine, who was involved in the
DNase studies. "When you look at a disease where your goal is to stay the  same
and you see an improvement, that means something."

   "Our hope is that DNase will help to buy precious time for individuals  with
CF so that they can benefit ultimately from a cure," says Shak.

     While scientists race to find a cure for cystic fibrosis, patients such  as
Jon Jantomaso run a race of their own.

   They are striving to stay alive until a cure arrives.

   Jantomaso has taken part in numerous CF camps around the United States in  an
attempt to inspire others to keep up the fight.

   Much of his strength comes from his belief in miracles. He believes someday
he will exist in heaven, free of the disease that has plagued him since he was
a boy.

   But the miracles of science soon may help Jantomaso and thousands of others
to be cured right here on earth.

GRAPHIC: COLOR PHOTO, Brian Baer; COLOR PHOTO, Fred Victorin, (2); COLOR PHOTO;
COLOR DRAWING; BLACK AND WHITE PHOTO, courtesy of Pat Jantomaso, (2); The
genetics laboratory at All Children's Hospital in St. Petersburg; Jon Jantomaso
running; Dr. Michelle Howenstine of All Children's Hospital checks on one of her
favorite patients - Christine Dunkle, a 6-year-old with cystic fibrosis; Jon
Jantomaso; Drawing showing the breakdown from carriers with cystic fibrosis to
people with the disease; Jon Jantomaso, crosses the finish line at the Marine
Corps Marathon in Washington, D.C., on Oct. 25, 1992; Jon after the marathon

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 1993


                             1289 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 1993 The Sunday Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                    The Sunday Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                            January 10, 1993 Sunday
                                 FOURTH Edition

SECTION: FORUM; Pg. D01

LENGTH: 2530 words

HEADLINE: THE DEFICIT WEB

BYLINE: ROBERT A. RANKIN

BODY:

   Sunday, January 10, 1993 THE DEFICIT WEB

   Summary: Effects of montrous debt entangles today's and tomorrow's
Americans' way of life and threatens the nation's economic survival

   The rock group Van Halen should have featured the monstrous federal budget
deficit in its award-winning music video ``Right Now!'' -- because right now
is precisely when the deficit is punishing you.

   Right now -- the deficit is pushing payments on a $60,000 mortgage $150
higher every month than they would be if federal budgets were balanced.

   Right now -- it costs every American man, woman and child an average of  $796
just to pay this year's interest on the national debt.

   Right now -- the government has no money to fight the cruel recession that
has thrown 10 million Americans out of work, because Washington's hands are
tied by deficits.

   Right now -- America is sinking further into debt at a rate of $13,000  every
second because of our politicians' failure to curb deficits.

   Since the presidential election in 1988, record deficits have added $976
billion to the national debt. The increase alone is greater than the total  debt
amassed by all the presidents from George Washington to Ronald Reagan.

   ``I actually happen to believe we're talking about the survival of American
democracy as we know it,'' said Carol Cox Wait, president of the bipartisan
Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget. ``If we cannot manage our fiscal
affairs in responsible fashion, this government cannot survive.''

   Hyperbole?

   Consider the following:

   Right now -- you have to pay through the nose to travel abroad or buy
imported goods because the dollar's value is near post-World War II lows,  which
also stems in part from the deficit.

   Right now -- there is $200 billion less to spend fighting AIDS, rebuilding
America or helping the homeless because that's how much the government is
spending to pay the interest on the national debt.

   Right now -- the Japanese own Rockefeller Center, half of the Seattle
Mariners and most of Hawaii's commercial real estate, in part because money
Americans might have borrowed to buy these properties was diverted to pay
interest on the federal debt instead.

   Right now -- the Baby Boom generation is halfway to retirement age, and the
economy is not expanding fast enough to support comfortably their future
pension and health-care needs, in part because deficits slow investment and
growth.

   ``That's just a precursor of what we're doing to our children,'' said Wait
of these effects. ``They'll have to pay our inherited debt as well as (pay  for)
what they want from government.''

   That's why so many people like Wait, the General Accounting Office, the
International Monetary Fund and countless other authorities are beseeching
President-elect Bill Clinton and Congress to get serious about fixing deficits
-- right now.

   The numbers that push experts to that view are daunting.

   From George Washington's presidency until the end of 1981 the national debt
grew to something less than $1 trillion. Today, it is more than $4 trillion --
that's $16,000 of debt for every man, woman and child in America.

   Put America's debt and deficits in terms of a family budget and the numbers
take on a frightening reality.

   For example, if Uncle Sam had no more income than the average American
family, but continued his spendthrift ways, he'd be taking home $820.23 every
week -- and spending $1,074.50.

   That's right, this year Uncle Sam is spending 31 percent more money than he
takes in from taxes. He borrows the difference and sends the debt bills to  your
children.

   Where does the money go? Broken into family-sized proportions, Uncle Sam's
1992 budget looks like this:

   Defense takes $232.09. That's 21.6 percent of his weekly income.

   Interest payments on the debt take $152.50, or 14.2 percent.

   Social Security payments take $219.20, or 20.4 percent.

   Then there are health costs. Uncle Sam helps old people pay their medical
bills with Medicare -- $91.33, or 8.5 percent. He also helps the poor through
Medicaid -- $70.92, or 6.6 percent.

   Don't forget pension payments to all the soldiers and civilians who used to
work for Uncle Sam -- $50.50, or 4.7 percent.

   Those categories alone add up to $816.62 -- only $3.61 short of Uncle Sam's
entire weekly income from tax revenues! And he hasn't even spent a nickel yet
on foreign aid, welfare, or the 1,001 other things the government spends money
on -- borrowed money. Yet Sam still hasn't cried uncle.

   How did we get into such a mess?

   In his 1961 inaugural address, President John F. Kennedy said: ``Ask not
what your country can do for you. Ask what you can do for your country.''

   But today many Americans ignore JFK's challenge and ask instead what their
country can do for them. Almost one of every two households depends on the
government to send them money or pay their bills.

   This is the root of the deficit crisis: Americans, rich and poor, feel
entitled to a vast array of costly benefits, from pensions and medical
insurance to food stamps and farm price supports.

   Such programs take 50 cents of each federal dollar spent, up from 23 cents
in the early 1960s. By contrast, defense took 50 cents in 1961 but will take
only 19 cents next year.

   The government began spending to help the impoverished during the Great
Depression. Middle-class and even well-off Americans became addicted to  federal
handouts during the presidencies of Lyndon B. Johnson and Richard  Nixon.
Social-welfare spending grew by 11 percent each year between 1965 and  1975, a
pace far faster than any time since.

   Social Security benefits were raised seven times in that period -- 20
percent in 1972 alone.

   Today only $1 out of every $10 spent on government handouts is reserved
exclusively for poor people.

   LBJ created Medicare and Medicaid in that era. The first guaranteed that
government would help pay medical bills for all Americans over 65; the second
made a similar promise to all poor Americans.

   In 1965, the average stay in a hospital cost $567 in today's dollars. Now,
in the age of laser surgery and gene therapy, that figure is almost $6,000.
Medicare costs have risen 10 percent a year since 1967, on average, after
inflation. Medicaid costs have risen 15.9 percent a year.

   Unless they're reined in, Medicare and Medicaid are expected to take almost
21 cents out of every federal dollar in five years. By 2000, these two  programs
together will cost more than any other program, including Social  Security. By
2025, Medicare alone could take nearly 30 cents of every dollar  the government
spends.

   Such ever-rising bills could make it all but impossible to balance the
budget unless America's entire health-care financing system is overhauled,  most
experts believe.

   The government has made additional promises: to pay for unemployment
insurance, food stamps, farm-price supports, and many other entitlements.  There
are no spending limits on any of these programs. Anyone qualified is
``entitled'' to these benefits by law. Entitlements are on automatic pilot.

   Congress frequently expanded these costly programs in the 1970s, often by
requiring payments to grow in lockstep with inflation.

   Then in 1981, President Reagan and Congress cut taxes, decrying
``tax-and-spend'' government. But spending kept growing -- because neither
Congress, Reagan nor a majority of voters wanted popular benefits cut.

   Today 21 entitlement programs pay out at least $1 billion each year.
Together, they will account for half -- $755 billion -- of all of this year's
federal spending.

   The decision over the last 10 years -- by Democratic Congresses and
Republican presidents -- to finance all of this with debt instead of taxes
created record-breaking annual deficits and sent the national debt soaring.

   These deficits are stealing our nation's treasure, experts say, but are  less
likely to explode in dramatic crisis than to result in slow economic
debilitation -- something like old age.

   ``The evidence of decay has been around for many years,'' said Brookings
Institution economist Barry Bosworth. ``After a decade or more in which
Americans have been unwilling to invest in their future, they should not be
surprised that the future looks a little grim.''

   Deficits cut America's savings in half in the 1980s. Government bonds and
other borrowings to finance the deficits absorbed 58 percent of national
savings in 1990 -- up from 2 percent in the 1960s.

   This, in turn, clouds our future because savings are needed to invest in
companies that create jobs and growth.

   Deficits also are hobbling America's government.

   The $199 billion in interest paid last year represents 14 cents of every
federal dollar spent. That is more than combined federal spending on the
environment, education, roads and airports, veterans, housing, space, science
and administration of justice.

   If current trends continue, annual interest payments could climb to $410
billion in 10 years and take one out of every six federal dollars spent. In 30
years the interest bill could soar past $1 trillion a year, or one out of  every
three federal dollars spent, according to the General Accounting  Office.

   ``Interest doesn't buy a thing,'' Ross Perot said. ``It doesn't spur new
businesses to give people jobs. It doesn't help people out of poverty. It
doesn't maintain our highways. It doesn't protect our forests and national
parks.''

   Deficits also weaken America's independence.

   After draining our national savings with deficits in the '80s, we borrowed
heavily from foreigners -- and became dependent on them to buy the government
bonds needed to finance the national debt and to help finance other needed
investments. Today the profits, interest and dividends from those foreign
investments are flowing back abroad.

   The International Monetary Fund strongly urges the United States to phase
out its budget deficits by raising taxes and controlling spending -- the same
medicine that IMF prescribes for sick economies from Argentina to Russia.

   Otherwise, if deficits keep siphoning off our own savings, IMF analysts say
we may have to raise interest rates very high to lure foreign money here. But
rising rates would curb investment by American business because they would
increase borrowing costs, limiting economic growth anew.

   There is no way out of this circular trap as long as deficits continue to
absorb so much of our savings. And most experts agree that deficits will hit
new heights in the mid-to-late 1990s because they are built into tomorrow's
budgets like time bombs.

   ``The explosion in the (future) deficit is driven by skyrocketing interest
costs, continuing large increases in health-care costs and, after 2010, a jump
in retirement costs as the Baby Boom generation retires,'' predicted Charles
Bowsher, head of the General Accounting Office.

   Many people think fixing the deficit is a snap.

   First: Slash defense spending; the Cold War is over.

   Next: Get tough on welfare chiselers.

   Third: Quit throwing money away on foreign aid; we need it here at home.

   And, of course, cut the fat! End that outrageous waste, fraud and abuse!
That'll take care of the deficit. Easy as pie.

   Such is the folk wisdom of many Americans. You hear them all the time -- in
the lunchroom, on the golf course, at the corner bar, in political speeches.

   Trouble is, it is dead wrong.

   Even deep spending cuts in those areas will leave big, growing federal
deficits, according to authoritative studies by the Office of Management and
Budget, the Congressional Budget Office and the General Accounting Office.

   To bring deficits under control, experts agree that Americans must accept
higher taxes or lower benefits from programs they like, including Medicare,
Medicaid and -- yes, eventually -- Social Security.

   Why? Because that's where the money goes.

   Politicians don't want to face that any more than taxpayers do.

   Clinton offers what might be called the Tinkerbell solution -- just wish
very hard for the deficit to go away, and if you truly believe, it will.

   ``I don't think (he) has any sort of deficit-reduction package that is
credible, '' said Donald H. Straszheim, chief economist for Merrill Lynch.

   Even Perot, who last spring ticked off four ways to chop $500 billion out  of
federal deficits without breaking a sweat, found it wasn't so simple.

   Intense study convinced him that the only realistic way to cut deficits was
to raise lots of taxes and trim spending on popular programs such as Social
Security, Medicare and Medicaid.

   Perot presented last July a plan laying out the ugly options -- after he
withdrew as a candidate. When he resumed his campaign in October, Perot said  it
was, in part, because of the unwillingness of his opponents to face the  deficit
crisis.

   But most people appear to be less concerned about the deficit than other
economic problems. In one late August survey, the deficit was identified as  the
main problem facing the nation by only 6 percent of the registered voters  who
were asked.

   ``We know what the options are. This is not an analytically difficult
problem. It's politically difficult,'' said Wait, of the Committee for a
Responsible Federal Budget.

   President Bush had called for spending caps on cash-benefit programs,
including Medicare and Medicaid, but never specified whose benefits that would
limit.

   Clinton similarly promised to cut medical costs throughout society -- but
failed to spell out how. He also projected much higher gains from his tax and
spending proposals than did the Treasury Department, Congress's Joint  Committee
on Taxation or the General Accounting Office.

   ``If you take out the exaggeration from some of (Clinton's) numbers, there
would probably be a slight increase in the deficit,'' said Rudolph Penner,
former director of the Congressional Budget Office.

   Bush had wanted to spur growth by cutting taxes like Reagan; Clinton wanted
to do it by spending like Lyndon Johnson. But history shows that when LBJ's
spending programs met Ronald Reagan's tax cuts, mega-deficits erupted.

   Left unfixed, deficits will hollow out the U.S. economy like dry rot by  2020
-- only one generation hence -- according to GAO projections.

   By 2020, each American's share of the by-then declining U.S. economy could
come to about $23,875. Each share of foreign debt would be $19,243; and each
share of federal debt would be $45,816.

   By contrast, if Washington lawmakers find the will to produce small annual
budget surpluses by 2005, they could gradually whittle down the debt and  slowly
boost national savings, investment and growth.

   That way, GAO calculates, each American's share of the U.S. economy would  be
far bigger by 2020, at $33,353; each share of foreign debt would be far
smalle,r at $1,979; and each share of federal debt would be a tiny $219.

   Which future will we give our children -- a high-prosperity, low-debt
economy, or the dismal opposite? That's the choice we face in coming years.

   ``We cannot walk away from this problem,'' said Bowsher. ``It will only get
worse.''

   Robert A. Rankin is a national correspondent for Knight-Ridder newspapers.
R.A. Zaldivar, also a national correspondent, contributed to this story.

   Knight-Ridder News Service.

   ILLUSTRATION: Drawing by GARY VISKUPIC/Newsday, Copyright.

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 2006


                             1290 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1993 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            January 9, 1993 Saturday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-1

LENGTH: 34 words

HEADLINE: SAN DIEGO

BYLINE: Compiled from staff and wire reports

BODY:

   Vical Inc. has filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for an
initial public offering of 3 million common shares at $9 to $11 per share. The
company is attempting to develop gene therapy technology.

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                             1291 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1993 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                    January 6, 1993, Wednesday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 13; Column 2; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 189 words

HEADLINE: CANCER PATIENT GETS UNPROVEN THERAPY

BYLINE: By Associated Press

DATELINE: SAN DIEGO

BODY:

   Doctors for the first time used a new, unproven gene therapy after federal
regulators honored a compassionate plea made by the family of a woman dying of
brain cancer.

   The patient was injected Monday with 2 million genetically altered cells in
hopes they will stimulate her immune system to fight her tumor. The treatment
was administered at Sharp Memorial Hospital.

   The 51-year-old patient has a tumor that has resisted conventional cancer
treatment. The woman's husband requested that the family remain anonymous to
protect their privacy.

   Federal regulators gave unprecedented permission last week to use the
unproven therapy after the family of the San Diego woman lobbied government
officials for approval. This was the first time such a compassionate plea was
honored.

   She went home Monday after receiving the injection and was reported to be in
good condition. Barring an adverse reaction to the injection, doctors plan to
administer increasingly larger doses every two weeks.

   "She tolerated the injection well," said Robert Sobol of the San Diego
Regional Cancer Center. "We're pleased things went very smoothly."


                             1292 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1993 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                     January 5, 1993, Tuesday, Home Edition

SECTION: View; Part E; Page 1; Column 2; View Desk

LENGTH: 2158 words

HEADLINE: HEALTH FORECAST '93;
WHAT THE DOCTOR MAY ORDER

BYLINE: By SHARI ROAN, TIMES HEALTH WRITER

BODY:

   It's a simple truth that medicine gets better every year: Discoveries are
made. Treatments are refined. Research goes on.

   But as discoveries have multiplied, the pool of Americans able to take
advantage of them has decreased. Fewer people can afford basic health care.

   In 1993, more people should have access to health care as reforms are ushered
in under the Clinton Administration. Greater access will be the big health news
this year, experts say. But there is much more to watch for. Here's a look
ahead:

   * For several reasons, 1993 will be the year of the prostate. The prostate
specific antigen test, a blood test that can indicate the presence of cancer, is
expected to see wider use and to make more men willing to be screened. The test
is more accurate and less invasive than a rectal examination and can detect the
cancer at an earlier stage.

   The debate over prostate cancer treatment will even out as consensus is
reached on when to recommend surgery, radiation, chemotherapy or other hormonal
treatments. At the same time, advances in understanding prostate cancer will
surface, including indications that the disease is caused by hormones. Hopes are
placed on the drug Proscar.

   High-profile spokesmen, such as Sen. Bob Dole (R-Kan.), will lobby for
increased research for prostate cancer much in the manner that women have
lobbied for breast cancer research.

   Prostate cancer centers, like breast centers, will appear. Many hospitals or
clinics that don't have prostate cancer support groups will start them.

   * The good news in the fight against infectious diseases will be the
explosion in the field of immunizations. Expect the long-awaited vaccine for
chicken pox, the varicella zoster vaccine, to be approved. In addition,
combination vaccines will become more common -- such as doses of DTP
(diphtheria, tetanus, pertussis), haemophilus Type B (which causes meningitis)
and, possibly, influenza in one shot.

   On the research front, scientists are working on vaccines for middle-ear
infection, several sexually transmitted diseases, a type of pneumonia,
respiratory syncytial virus and rotavirus (which causes gastroenteritis in
children).

   * In 1993 and beyond, we'll see many new screening tests and treatments based
on genetics, because the Human Genome project, a decades-long effort to map
human genetic structure, is ahead of schedule.

   For example, a prenatal screening test for cystic fibrosis is available on a
limited basis, and the government may recommend that it be offered to all
pregnant women. It's also likely that the first gene therapy experiments for
cystic fibrosis will begin early this year; three groups have received approval
for such therapy.

   Advances in molecular sciences also will lead to a prenatal screening test
for all hereditary diseases: a simple blood test that analyzes the small
quantities of fetal blood cells in the mother's bloodstream. This test will
become available in the next two or three years.

   * Scientific advances in prevention will be small but significant. For
example, a recent study showed that by analyzing the breast tissue
characteristics of normal mammograms, radiologists might be able to predict a
woman's risk. Thus, preventive recommendations now issued for the population as
a whole can be individualized.

   "If we can predict future risk . . . we could then recommend more frequent
mammography or other medical examinations for this high-risk group," says Dr.
Martin J. Yaffee of the University of Toronto, who helped develop the risk
assessment.

   * After a year of focusing on the major killers of women, such as breast
cancer and heart disease, the research spotlight will shift to often-ignored
chronic, painful women's diseases, including interstitial cystitis,
endometriosis and fibroid tumors.

   * Mental health providers will turn activist in 1993, and a unified effort
will be made by providers and consumer organizations to push for mental health
benefits in all health plans.

   Group therapy, which began in the 1940s to help soldiers adjust to postwar
life, will re-emerge as a means to lower the costs of mental health therapy. The
practice boomed in the late 1960s and is still popular in inpatient hospital
treatment but has dwindled elsewhere. Experts will explore ways to revive group
therapy in other settings.

   Employers will opt for managed-care plans for mental health coverage that
emphasize group therapy and favor therapists who can provide effective
short-term therapy.

   * Advances in contraceptives will include a new, flexible IUD and a radical,
ultra-thin condom.

   * Officials will strongly emphasize the prevention of injuries, especially in
the workplace. Injuries are a major cause of the nation's astronomical health
care bill.

   A total of 6.3 million occupational illnesses and injuries occurred in 1991,
resulting in the highest number of lost workdays ever -- 60 million. These
statistics have prompted an outcry for a stronger federal Occupational Safety
and Health Act, and legislation to strengthen OSHA will surface this month in
Washington.

   * Health officials are concerned that Americans are setting themselves up for
outbreaks of one or more highly contagious infectious diseases because of
several factors: 1) lax surveillance; 2) worldwide outbreaks of diseases like
malaria and polio; 3) large numbers of people who do not receive basic
immunizations.

   The Institute of Medicine, a prestigious panel that advises the government,
recently reported that an "era of complacency is one of the main reasons
microbial threats seem to be on the rise."

   Diseases such as malaria and polio are unlikely in the United States. But
officials have warned of the possibility of a massive influenza epidemic like
the one that killed 20 million people worldwide in 1918-19.

   * The return of tuberculosis to frightening proportions is a signal that
infectious diseases remain a threat. Look for the continued rise of TB cases to
provoke intense debate for stronger preventive measures. The debate will surface
on whether mandatory quarantine may be a needed last resort for patients who
either won't or can't take TB medication.

   * An anti-arthritic drug, naproxen, could move from prescription to
over-the-counter (OTC) status, while government officials scrutinize whether to
make other medications over-the-counter in the next several years. Included in
the latter group will be non-sedating antihistamines, ulcer drugs like Tagamet,
tobacco deterrents and drugs to control blood pressure and lower cholesterol.

   A drug to curb craving in alcoholics, called naltrexone, will soon become
widely used, and other drugs to curb addictions will become available later in
the decade.

   The first drug specifically approved for treatment of wrinkles, a form of
Retin-A with moisturizer called Renova, will be approved for prescription use.

   * New medical specialties for adolescents and women will emerge. Adolescent
health will surface as a strong sub-specialty while doctors review guidelines on
treating teen-agers. These guidelines suggest that adolescents have an annual
preventive visit that focuses on traditional medical factors as well as diet,
fitness, safety, alcohol and drug use, sexual behavior, depression or suicide
risk, learning problems and potential physical or sexual abuse.

   Because of lifestyle factors such as drug abuse and sexual activity, "teens
are not as healthy today as they were a decade ago," says Dr. Arthur Elster,
director of the American Medical Assn.'s Department of Adolescent Health. "It's
clear that we need a new and expanded approach."

   Meanwhile, specialists in women's health will provide more than obstetrics
and gynecological care, also focusing on addictions, diet, fitness, spousal
abuse and other lifestyle and social issues.

   * Acupuncture will be the first of the alternative health practices to move
more deeply into mainstream medicine as several studies show its effectiveness
for the treatment of chronic pain, drug addiction, nausea and allergies.

   * Research on the "abortion pill," RU-486, as well as on fetal tissue will
resume in the United States, although under tight controls. The hot areas of
research will be the use of RU-486 for treatment of benign meningiomas (tumors
that line the brain and spinal cord) while fetal tissue research shows promise
for treatment of Parkinson's disease.

   * Expect to see nurse practitioners taking over more day-to-day care of
patients, particularly because of a critical shortage of general physicians.

   * Perhaps the biggest developments in health care this year, however, will be
in economics.

   In electing Bill Clinton to the presidency, voters backed the concept of a
new system of health care that would include all Americans.

   But many experts suggest that Clinton's restructuring of health care, at
least in the first year or two, will be modest, focusing on reducing costs and
ensuring that everyone receives minimum care.

   "It's clear that there will be some kind of health reform in 1993. The
question for me is how visionary that will be," says Clement Bezold, executive
director of the Institute for Alternative Futures, an Alexandria, Va., think
tank for health issues. "We need access to health care for the uninsured. But we
also need to reinvent the health care system. There is a lot of talk about the
first, but not a lot of talk about the second. The first will dominate the
headlines."

   Overall, it is hoped that most people will have, at the least, a basic health
benefits package coming from a variety of funding sources, such as government
and employers. But the more visionary changes will take longer. Eventually,
access to preventive care will be a larger part of the picture. The
"predict-and-manage" approach -- to identify risks and prevent or minimize the
effects of illness, rather than the treatment of acute disease -- will
increasingly become the focus of health plans.

   Americans will notice other, subtle shifts in health care. Employers will
focus more on managed-care health plans for their employees, forcing more people
to give up longtime doctors and find new ones.

   Because of the growth in managed care, physician hospital organizations --
where doctors and hospitals market their services together -- will continue to
appear. Increasingly, large group practices will buy out smaller groups or
merge, making solo practice rare.

   Billing procedures will be simplified to save administrative costs, perhaps
including combining many services in a unified bill.

   * Learn this term: outcome data, which will be a watchword for health care in
the '90s. Using the data involves compiling statistics that will tell consumers,
insurers, government and doctors how well certain treatments work and at what
costs. When, for example, a proposed National Outcomes Database is established,
doctors would list each treatment and how the patient fared, then would use the
database to make treatment decisions. Thus, they will refer more to guidelines
in treating patients rather than relying on instinct.

   Says Bezold: "In the '90s, we'll have the ability to compare our physician
with all the other physicians in town."

The Good News in '92

   * Coverage: Americans make health-care coverage a top issue in the elections.

   * Women: Consumers see a surge of interest and funding on women's health
issues.

   * Prostate cancer screening: A protein called prostate specific antigen
proves to be the best indicator of prostate cancer and becomes widely available.

   * Food labeling: The government approves a labeling plan to clarify nutrition
information on a majority of food products.

   * Cystic fibrosis: Rapid progress is made in prenatal screening of CF and in
treatment of the disease.

The Bad News in '92

   * AIDS: HIV-infection rates continue to soar. Research funding is inadequate.
Fear remains, as when NBA players overreact to playing with Magic Johnson.

   * Fetal tissue research: President Bush vetoes bill to lift the ban on fetal
tissue research, which has shown promise in treating Parkinson's disease.

   * Bad doctors: In one of California's worst cases of alleged patient abuse,
gynecologist Ivan C. Namihas of Tustin was accused of abusing dozens of women
over decades. Namihas gave up his practice.

   * Tuberculosis: The disease that was once almost eradicated soars.

Too Soon to Tell

   * Breast implants: Was the FDA's ban on silicone breast implants prudent?

   * Tamoxifen: Is the study on whether tamoxifen can prevent breast cancer in
healthy women promising and visionary, or dangerous and misguided?

   * Clinton: Will the President-elect make good on his pledge to provide health
care to all Americans?

   * Coffee: One study shows even a couple of cups may increase heart disease
risk. The study is the latest in a long line of contradictions on the health
risks of America's favorite beverage.

   * Euthanasia: Americans favor the principle, but can't agree on the
specifics.

GRAPHIC: Photo, COLOR, Health Forecast '93


                             1293 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1993 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            January 5, 1993 Tuesday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-1

LENGTH: 672 words

HEADLINE: Injection launches new gene therapy;
Brain-cancer patient receives altered cells

BYLINE: DAVID GRAHAM, Staff Writer

BODY:

   With a simple injection of cells into the arm of a woman dying of brain
cancer, La Jolla doctors yesterday began the first use of human gene therapy in
San Diego. The cells have been altered to carry a gene that physicians hope will
stimulate the 51-year-old patient's immune system to attack a tumor that has not
responded to conventional cancer treatment. The San Diego woman received the
injection of about 2 million cells -- amounting to one-fifth of a teaspoon -- at
Sharp Memorial Hospital in Kearny Mesa under the supervision of Drs. Ivor
Royston and Robert Sobol of the San Diego Regional Cancer Center. Federal
regulators last week granted Royston and Sobol unprecedented permission to use
their unproven therapy on a compassionate basis after the woman's family lobbied
government officials for approval. "She tolerated the injection well," Sobol
said.

   After being monitored through the afternoon, the woman left for home before 7
p.m. in good condition.

   "We're pleased things went very smoothly," he said. If the patient has no
adverse reaction to the injection, the doctors plan to administer additional,
larger doses every two weeks.

   It could be a month before any beneficial effect is apparent, Royston said.
Doctors will monitor what is happening in her body with several tests. About
every two weeks, they will expose blood samples taken from the woman to cells
taken from her tumor and placed in a lab dish.

   They want to see if immune cells in her blood will attack the cancerous
cells, Sobol said.

   They will also test for any new antibody responses to the tumor. Doctors also
will use brain imaging techniques to determine the size of the tumor and whether
it is continuing to grow. The woman's husband has asked that the family not be
identified to preserve their privacy. The cells injected yesterday have been
altered to contain a gene for interleukin 2, a protein that the scientists
believe is crucial for stimulating increased activity of the immune system's
cytotoxic T-cells, sometimes called killer T-cells, which fight disease. Doctors
hope these T-cells in the woman's bloodstream would then circulate in the brain
and attack her tumor. The T-cell defense mechanism generally does not attack
cancer cells, perhaps because they seem too similar to normal cells, Royston
said.

   The doctors hope by heightening T-cell activity, the treatment will increase
the chance of an immune response. The cells the patient received are from her
own tumor and were removed during an earlier surgery.

   They have been irradiated so that they are harmless. Doctors felt it was
important to use the tumor cells because they worked more effectively with
interleukin 2 in stimulating T-cell activity in animal tests, Royston said. An
emerging type of medicine that offers great promise, gene therapy uses
transplanted genes in a variety of ways to supply natural products to treat
illness. Some two dozen different gene therapy techniques have been approved by
the federal government, but Sobol and Royston are the first to cause regulators
to allow the use of an unproven therapy on a compassionate basis. Doctors
decided to try the technique against the brain tumor when the woman's primary
physician asked them whether it might work, Royston said. The woman's cancer had
not been eradicated by conventional surgery, radiation and chemotherapy.

   The type of tumor, a grade four glioblastoma, is almost always fatal. There
is no evidence from laboratory studies that the technique will attack the tumor,
the doctors acknowledge, but they argue that even the smallest chance of success
is worth a try.

   The doctors also stand to learn how to improve the therapy as they try it.
Royston and Sobol have thought their gene therapy might be most effective
against other cancers, such as those in the kidney, colon, skin and prostate.

   They are continuing tests in animals in hopes of receiving approval from the
National Institutes of Health and the U.S. Food and Drug Administration to begin
full-scale trials in people with those types of tumors.

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                             1294 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1993 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                     January 4, 1993, Monday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; PAGE F1

LENGTH: 2046 words

HEADLINE: Cashing In On Medical Discoveries;
Hopkins's Corporate Ties To Help Fund Research

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Sandra Sugawara, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   Stephen Turner, chairman of Oncor Inc., a Gaithersburg biotech company,
picked up the phone last April and was surprised to hear a pitch from the Johns
Hopkins University School of Medicine.

   The proposal, made by medical school official Scott L. Sherman, was this: If
Oncor funded research in the newly established laboratory of university
researcher David Sidransky, the biotechnology firm could have first rights to
discoveries coming from that work.

   "We do a lot of licensing with universities, and the Hopkins arrangement is
really state of the art. Licensing prior to discovery of cancer genes is highly
unusual," Turner said. But for Oncor, it could substantially reduce the amount
of time it might take to turn a gene discovery into a commercial product and
help the firm beat competitors to market.

   There were other unusual aspects to this deal. Of the more than $ 1 million
that Oncor will pay Hopkins over three years, about 20 percent will be in Oncor
stock. Until June, the university and faculty members could not accept stock in
a company doing research there. The deal also made it through the university
bureaucracy in less than six months, a speed that amazed Turner, who said that
previous attempts by Oncor to establish a relationship with Hopkins "had never
made any headway."

   The Oncor deal is just one in a flurry of activities that began about a year
ago as Hopkins set about to aggressively pursue corporate alliances that could
bring research funds to the school and financial rewards to its leading
scientists.

   Hopkins joins a parade of other research universities that are seeking
lucrative relationships with biotech, pharmaceutical and other companies to
satisfy a seemingly insatiable appetite for research dollars in the face of an
explosion of biomedical discoveries over the past decade. University faculty
contacts with industry are expanding at an unprecedented rate, according to a
recently published book, "Biomedical Research: Collaboration and Conflict of
Interest."

   The increasing number of alliances with industry are resulting in dramatic
cultural changes in once-insular academic institutions, transforming researchers
into experts on things such as patents, stock options and venture capital. "The
boundaries between industry, academia and government are increasingly grayer,"
said Sheldon Krinsky, a Tufts University professor and chairman of the Council
for Responsible Genetics, a Cambridge, Mass., research watchdog group.

   The mixing of scholarship and entrepreneurial activities raises a number of
worrisome issues for universities. Will researchers be tempted to manipulate
tests if they hold stock in a company? Will they slant results to help companies
paying them substantial consulting fees? Will increasing financial ties between
academia and industry stifle open communications among university scientists and
skew research away from critical but commercially undesirable research toward
work with more immediate payoffs?

   The alliances, however, also hold enormous promise for universities -- as a
new source of funds in the face of an anticipated leveling off of federal money,
as a way to keep the brightest scientists at universities and to speed the
transfer of technology from university labs to the marketplace.

   The alliances also are seen as critical economic development tools by
communities. In Maryland, where Johns Hopkins has replaced Bethlehem Steel Corp.
and Westinghouse Electric Corp. as the state's largest private employer, leaders
hope that the university's new push will spark a boom in local start-up
companies, comparable to the entrepreneurial activity that surrounds Stanford
and Harvard universities and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

   To date, such spinoff activities at Hopkins have been meager, which some
local development experts have blamed on the conservative culture of Hopkins.
During the past decade, while many faculty members and universities across the
country were busy starting up companies to cash in on their scientific
discoveries, Hopkins was notably on the sidelines, with one of the strictest
conflict of interest rules in the country.

   Most of the university's relationships with industry were traditional ones,
licensing technology discoveries to pharmaceutical companies or performing
clinical studies for companies that wanted to test new drugs.

   That conservative culture has been changing, however, under the leadership of
Michael M.E. Johns, who became dean of the medical school two years ago, and
senior associate dean David A. Blake, who has overseen the changes.

   Johns set the stage a year ago, in a letter sent to all 1,400 full-time
faculty members, strongly endorsing "enhanced commercial activity on the part of
faculty." In the letter, he announced some major moves, including the hiring of
attorney Sherman to pursue corporate alliances for the medical school in a new
Office of Corporate Liaison, and an expansion of the Office of Technology
Licensing, which reviews faculty inventions.

   A few months later came perhaps the most radical step, a decision to loosen
the conflict of interest policies, enabling faculty members and the university
to hold stock in companies.

   "I think anybody involved in economic development in Baltimore sees a virtual
sea change in culture at Hopkins," said David Gillece, economic development
consultant in Baltimore. "I know for a fact that Scott is meeting virtually
daily with companies looking to establish relations with Hopkins."

   One of those who was contacted was M. James Barrett, president of Genetic
Therapy Inc. of Gaithersburg, who said he has been impressed by Hopkins's new
pro-business attitude. "Until very recently, Hopkins hasn't really been
aggressive in terms of outreach to companies," he said. "But there has been a
sea change in Hopkins's inclination to develop relationships with private
investors."

   Already the school has drawn the attention of venture capital firms, such as
HealthCare Investments Corp., the largest private venture capital fund devoted
to health care, which hopes in the next three to five years to form 10 to 15
companies in the Baltimore area based on Hopkins's discoveries.

   Still, Hopkins has a long way to go before it can catch up with schools such
as MIT, which received $ 53.6 million from industry for research projects in
1992. That compares with $ 12.6 million that Hopkins received in 1992. Since
1987, MIT has helped create about three dozen high-tech firms based on science
developed in its laboratories. Hopkins medical school's first joint project with
the business community, CardioLogic Systems Inc., will open in Baltimore next
week.

   A major motivation behind Hopkins's change of heart was a pragmatic need to
find new sources of money. "Everyone knows that this is a time that the
[National Institutes of Health] dollars either will be leveling off or
diminishing in certain areas, and frankly technology transfer and a whole
variety of commercialization activities are a way to tap into new sources of
revenue," Sherman said.

   School officials said that to keep top researchers at Hopkins, discoveries
must get from the labs to the patient as quickly as possible. Industry is
critical to doing that.

   "What's really changed is that we have young people who now know that, in
their lifetime, they can discover the molecular basis for a genetic disease and
develop a means of detecting and curing it," the medical school's Blake said.
"That's something that was not possible when I was in training 25 years ago.
Back then, if you could discover a new gene in a lifetime it was considered an
accomplishment.

   "But now we have people who, before they are even on the faculty, have
already discovered a gene and cloned it. Naturally they want to develop it ...
and these days it's within their reach to do it, but only if they can interact
with the commercial sector."

   The idea of ties between universities and the biomedical industry is really a
throwback to the days before World War II, when the federal government provided
less than 10 percent of the funding for biomedical research, according to the
book "Biomedical Research: Collaboration and Conflict of Interest." The book was
edited by Roger J. Porter, a physician who was formerly with the National
Institutes of Health (NIH), and Thomas E. Malone, vice president of the
Association of American Medical Colleges.

   However, those ties weakened in the period after World War II through the
1970s as government funding for biomedical research rose steadily, eventually
providing more than half of all research funds. During the 1980s the trend again
reversed itself with "a virtual explosion ... in the number and variety of
alliances between academia and industry," wrote Alicia K. Dustira, a White House
science policy analyst, in one chapter. Industry support grew to 46 percent from
29 percent while the federal portion fell to 44 percent from 60 percent.

   Hopkins officials had been noticing this trend, but what "really tipped the
scale" was a cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) discovery, Blake said.

   Six years ago, Hopkins got a patent on an inflatable vest that automatically
performs CPR to restart the heart and maintain blood flow after cardiac arrest.
Preliminary studies indicate the vest is more effective than manual CPR, which
was developed at Hopkins in 1958.

   "We consider this to be a very important advance in cardiopulmonary
resuscitation," Blake said. "We tried to license it to a company for six years,
but none of them wanted to license it and develop it."

   More than a year ago, medical school officials decided to change the school's
policies to enable it to form a company to market the vest. In November, Jeff
Keopsell, an Atlanta entrepreneur, was contacted by a friend at Hopkins.
Keopsell became a consultant, helping Hopkins draw up a business plan, put
together a management team and woo venture capitalists.

   The deal was completed in December, with Keopsell signing on as president and
chief executive of CardioLogic Systems. Two venture capital groups that had
backed Keopsell's last technology start-up company are the major shareholders.
Hopkins has a minority interest.

   The new conflict of interest rules adopted last June allow the university and
faculty to own stock in companies that do research at the school. But all
arrangements must be approved by a university committee. And neither the
university nor its faculty can buy or sell stock until two years after the first
commercial sale of a product approved by the Food and Drug Administration. By
that time, commercial sales, not research studies, will influence stock prices,
say university officials.

   Hopkins's conflict of interest rules are stricter than at some universities
and more lenient than at others.  During most of the 1980s, most universities
had few controls over financial dealings of their faculty, until some scandals
erupted in which researchers were charged with minimizing negative results or
selling their stock for a substantial profit before their negative studies were
published.

   Now many universities have some conflict of interest policy. MIT, for
instance, allows faculty members to start companies and own stock in those
companies, but, unlike Hopkins, does not restrict when they buy and sell the
stock. However, MIT does restrict faculty members from doing research for those
companies. Harvard has a committee that reviews arrangements on a case-by-case
basis.

   Congress has urged NIH to consider restrictions that would prohibit grant
recipients from profiting from products they are evaluating. But efforts at
writing such regulations have been bogged down at NIH, because of protests by
universities and biotech companies, who argue that stock is sometimes the only
way they can afford to pay researchers.

   NIH forbids its employees to own stock in companies for which they do
research, but allows them to receive consulting fees of up to $ 25,000 a year
from any one company.

   "I have always thought it was a mistake to have an absolute ban on holding
equity," Blake said. "I think the situations are far too complex to say that
every case in which equity is involved is a conflict of interest that is
unacceptable."endquad


GRAPHIC: PHOTO, ONCOR CHAIRMAN STEPHEN TURNER CALLS HIS COMPANY'S LICENSING
ARRANGEMENT WITH JOHNS HOPKINS "STATE OF THE ART.", JOHN HOPKINS UNIVERSITY;
PHOTO, ELLSWORTH J. DAVIS; CHART, JOHN ANDERSON100,000 fund for needy female
students, the Cincinnati Enquirer reported. Principal Doris Frye said CAPE, an
alternative school that has students from all over the city in grades 6 through
12, is 63 percent black.

LOAD-DATE: October 14, 1993


                             1295 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1993 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                     January 4, 1993, Monday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; PAGE F8

LENGTH: 806 words

HEADLINE: Baltimore Bancorp Raises Capital Level by $ 4.7 Million

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: From News Services and Staff Reports

BODY:

   Baltimore Bancorp raised $ 4.7 million in the fourth quarter through the sale
of common stock and its dividend reinvestment and stock purchase plan, the bank
company said last week.

   The company received $ 3.2 million from stockholders under its dividend
reinvestment and stock purchase plan. An additional $ 1.5 million came from the
exchange of stock for notes.

   "We are extremely pleased that this expression of investor confidence has
helped us move ahead of our original capital plan," said Joseph A. Cicero, chief
financial officer.

   Baltimore Bancorp is a $ 2.7 billion Baltimore-based bank holding company.
Its principal subsidiary, the Bank of Baltimore, operates 47 branches in the
Washington-Baltimore area.

   PHP Healthcare Corp. of Alexandria has bought a consulting firm that designs
health-care systems.

   PHP said it paid $ 500,000 in cash and notes for Eastwest Research Corp. of
Bethesda. Eastwest Research will be a wholly-owned subsidiary of PHP.

   The purchase is designed to broaden PHP's ability to deliver managed
health-care products, said Charles H. Robbins, president and chairman of PHP.

   The State of Wisconsin Investment Board, which manages pension funds for
Wisconsin state employees, has acquired 7.3 percent, or 1.5 million common
shares, of ICF International Inc., a Fairfax environmental service firm,
according to a Securities and Exchange Commission filing. The Wisconsin
investment board also has cut its stake in E.A. Engineering Science & Technology
of Hunt Valley, another environmental consulting firm, to less than 5 percent
after selling 178,000 common shares.

   Genetic Therapy Inc. of Gaithersburg filed with the Securities and Exchange
Commission to sell an additional 2 million common shares to the public.

   The biotechnology company could raise as much as $ 22 million through the
sale, it said in its SEC filing.

   Smith Barney, Harris Upham & Co. and Montgomery Securities Corp. will
underwrite the sale. Proceeds will be used to finance research and development
and to expand operations, the company said.

   Two District tourism promotion groups have picked a District-based
advertising agency, Goldberg, Marchesano, Kohlman, to handle their accounts.
Together the two groups, the D.C. Committee to Promote Washington and the
Washington D.C. Convention & Visitors Association, spend $ 1.3 million annually
on advertising.

   Danaher Corp., a manufacturing conglomerate with headquarters in the
District, acquired Anderson Instrument Co. The Fultonville, N.Y., company, which
has annual revenue of about $ 10 million, makes instruments and controls used
mostly in fluid processing, particularly in the dairy, pharmaceutical and food
industries. No price was disclosed.

   Gaithersburg Office Supply and the Officeworks Group of Rockville announced a
joint venture in which they will merge their services, although they will keep
separate names.

   Patriot National Bank of Reston formed a discount brokerage service
department to trade in stocks, bonds and other securities.

   Petrie, Dierman, Kugn, a McLean-based real estate development firm
specializing in retail projects, received funding for a 1.5 million square foot
mall in Milpitas, Calif., just north of San Jose. The discount shopping center,
to be called the Great Mall of the Bay Area, will be in an old Ford Motor Co.
plant that closed in 1983.

   Trade Associates Inc., a Rockville company that runs trade shows, has
received contracts for three national shows: the International Oil Spill
Conference and Exposition in Tampa in March; the National Society for
Performance and Instruction Annual Conference and Expo in Chicago in April; and
the IEEE Nuclear Science Symposium and Exposition in San Francisco in November.

   Univax Biologics Inc. of Rockville said it has begun a "plasma donor
stimulation program" using an investigational vaccine. In this program, blood
plasma donors will be inoculated with the vaccine, Mucoid Exopolysaccharide, in
the hopes that they will produce antibodies. The antibody-filled plasma will
then be used to prepare a product to treat a bacterial infection common in
cystic fibrosis patients.

   Forbes Group of Fairfax formed a new division, Demand Communications, to sell
fax-on-demand services to associations. The services allow users to request
documents via fax from a central computer.

   Mayet Research, a Fairfax opinion research firm, added five trade and
professional associations to its client roster.

   Harkins Builders Inc. of Silver Spring has signed a $ 5.54 million contract
to build a three-story, 153-unit senior citizens' housing project in Prince
George's County.?

   Announcements of news and developments affecting Washington area companies
should be sent to Regional Report, Business News Department, The Washington
Post, 1150 15th St. NW, Washington, D.C., 20071-5302.

LOAD-DATE: October 14, 1993


                             1296 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1993 The Columbus Dispatch
                            Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)



                            January 3, 1993, Sunday

SECTION: NEWS LOCAL & NATIONAL; Pg. 6B

LENGTH: 886 words

HEADLINE: HUBBLE TOPPED SCIENCE STORIES

BYLINE: Michael B. Lafferty; Dispatch Science Reporter

BODY:


   The biggest news on the science scene last year may well have been the Hubble
Space Telescope. It brought the universe into American homes in a spectacular
way.

   The slight flaw discovered in the telescope's main mirror after launch in
1991 embarrassed National Aeronautics and Space Administration officials. But
Hubble was never as crippled as it seemed since the observatory has a range of
instruments and only the mirror wasn't quite up to snuff.

   So when astronomers started using the telescope in earnest, the NASA
publicity people were ready. Newsrooms were flooded with a galaxy full of
Hubble's observations: pictures of the most distant galaxy known, better images
of Jupiter's moon Io, observations of a gaggle of distant galaxies that could
shed light on the search for dark matter, the elusive missing mass of the
universe and pictures of dust and gas formations around distant stars that
astronomers believe could eventually lead to the formation of planets.

   Advances in astronomy were matched by discoveries in genetics. The government
approved a number of gene therapy techniques to treat genetically influenced
diseases, including some forms of cancer.

   Genetics has become important in areas as diverse as studying microscopic
plants in Lake Erie to disease therapy. Scientists even learned that a gene that
controls the death of unneeded cells in roundworms resembles the gene for some
cancers of the lymph nodes.

   Top science stories of 1992 as culled from the pages of Science News:

   Anthropology

   Scientists say they may have discovered the fabled 5,000-year-old city of
Ubar in the Arabian desert. The city was a center of trade along the caravan
routes between Mesopotamia and the Mediterranean.

   The frozen body of a prehistoric man was discovered by hikers near the border
between Italy and Austria. Research indicates the highly preserved body is about
5,300 years old.

   Astronomy

   NASA's Cosmic Background Explorer detected temperature fluctuations in the
radiation remaining after the creation of the universe. The fluctuations
represent tiny variations in the density of matter that could have triggered the
cosmos to evolve into its collection of galaxies.

   Images from the Hubble Space Telescope included one showing that the giant
elliptical galaxy M87 may contain a black hole 2.6 million times the mass of the
sun.

   Behavior

   Tests with a sea lion suggested that logical judgments thought possible only
by humans do not depend on language.

   Controversial research indicated that genetics exerts an important influence
on the development of homosexuality.

   Biology

   A foreign gene was successfully transferred from wheat, paving the way for
better yield and disease resistance.

   A naturally occurring protein was found that prompts mature nerve cells to
grow and divide, upsetting the theory that central nervous system cells in adult
mammals lose the ability to reproduce.

   Biomedicine

   High blood pressure, even when controlled, may cause the brain to shrink,
according to researchers who study aging.

   Scientists discovered a virus that causes an AIDS-like illness and developed
a vaccine that protects chimpanzees against AIDS-infected white blood cells.

   Chemistry

   A scanning tunnel microscope was used to create the tiniest battery yet and
to split individual molecules.

   Chemists developed alternative sources of taxol, the promising anti-cancer
drug found in yew bark.

   Mathematics

   Researchers developed a neural network that can teach itself to judge depth
and recognize objects.

   Computer scientists identified the largest prime number yet discovered.

   Geology

   Correlating volcanic deposits on both sides of the Atlantic, geologists
detected evidence of the largest volcanic eruption in the last 500 million
years.

   After studying a mineral deposit in Nevada, scientists challenged the idea
that variations in Earth's orbit control the timing of ice ages.

   Environment

   The first global survey of soil erosion showed that more than 3 billion acres
of cropland, more area than China and India combined, are damaged.

   After rising sharply for a decade, global temperatures dropped during the
first half of the year as a result of sulfuric acid aerosols from the eruption
of Mount Pinatubo.

   Food

   An on-going study of 90,000 female nurses started in 1980 found no link
between dietary fat and breast cancer.

   A chemist found green tea contains chemicals that fight tooth decay.

   Materials Science

   Chemists made a lighter than air gel. Aerogels were found to be the best
insulators and good filters.

   Scientists are learning to make stronger materials by studying the structure
of natural ones.

   Physics

   Evidence mounted that planetary orbits are chaotic, suggesting limits on the
ability to predict the solar system's long-term future.

   Researchers failed to find deviations in Newton's law of gravity in an
attempt to establish existence of a theoretical ''fifth force.''

   Space

   The Giotto spacecraft flew within 200 kilometers of comet Grigg-Skjellerup,
establishing a new record as the closest visit yet to the core of a comet.

   The Magellan spacecraft produced the first radar images showing evidence of
landslides on Venus. Other images from Magellan indicated surface scars on Venus
are the result of subduction.

GRAPHIC: photo, The Hubble telescope brought the universe into focus in a degree
never before possible. File poto

LOAD-DATE: July 21, 1994


                             1297 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1993 The Buffalo News
                            Buffalo News (New York)



                     January 1, 1993, Friday, City Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 560 words

HEADLINE: ADVANCE IN BRAIN-TUMOR VACCINE REPORTED

BYLINE: Associated Press

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

    Researchers report that by altering certain genes in rats' brain-tumor
cells, they have been able to trigger killer immune cells that seek out and
attack deadly brain cancers.

   In a study published in today's issue of the journal Science, researchers at
Case Western Reserve University report that genetically manipulated brain-tumor
cells act rather like a cancer vaccine if they are reinjected into rats with
brain cancer.

   "The idea is to make the cancer cells more visible to the body's own immune
system," said Mark L. Tykocinski of the Case Western Institute of Pathology.

   The research was conducted in laboratory rats. Whether or not the technique
can ever be used on human brain cancer is still uncertain and will require
additional research, Tykocinski said.

   Cancer cells typically are almost invisible to the body's immune system, said
the scientist. Immune-system cells that usually attack and kill invading
bacteria or other foreign cells will usually not touch cancer cells. Instead,
the cancer cells are treated like they belong in the body.

   Tykocinski said that to overcome this problem, he and his colleagues devised
a way to give high visibility to a type of rat brain cancer called glioblastoma.

   He said the researchers manipulated brain-cancer cells so that a gene called
the insulin-like growth factor was prevented from working. Insulin-like growth
factor, or IGF-1, is active in glioblastoma.

   The altered cells were then injected into rats that also were injected with
live brain-cancer cells. Tykocinski said the result was that the rats' immune
systems were alerted to the altered brain-cancer cells and the untreated brain
cancer.

   In effect, he said, the genetically altered cancer cells worked against the
other cancer cells like a vaccine works against infection.

   Although much more study is needed before the technique could be applied to
humans, Tykocinski said, the system is a variation of gene therapy that already
has been applied to humans.

   If further study proves the technique feasible, he said, it could work like
this: A patient with brain cancer would undergo surgery, and cells from the
tumor would be removed. Genes in the cells would be manipulated so that the
IGF-1 gene no longer worked. The altered cells then would be reinjected into the
patient.

   The altered cells would cause the patient's immune system to make antibodies
that then attack both the altered cells and any other brain-tumor cells it could
find. In this way, said Tykocinski, the patient's own immune system would kill
the tumor.

LOAD-DATE: January 4, 1993


                             1298 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                 January 1, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 18; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 414 words

HEADLINE: Scientists Make 'Cancer Vaccine' of Altered Genes

BYLINE: AP

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 31

BODY:

   Researchers report that by altering genes in tumor cells they have been able
to turn on killer immune cells that attack deadly brain cancers.

   In a study being published Friday in the journal Science, researchers at Case
Western Reserve University in Cleveland report that the genetically manipulated
brain tumor cells act rather like a cancer vaccine if they are re-injected into
rats with brain cancer.

    "The idea is to make the cancer cells more visible to the body's own immune
system," said Dr. Mark L. Tykocinski of the university's Institute of Pathology.
Determining whether the technique can ever be used on brain cancer in humans
will require additional research, he said.

   The body has difficulty fighting off cancer because the diseased cells are
almost invisible to the immune system, Dr. Tykocinski said. The immune system
cells that usually attack and kill invading bacteria or other foreign cells will
usually not touch cancer cells. Instead, the cancer cells are treated as if they
belong in the body.

   Dr. Tykocinski said that to overcome this problem, he and his colleagues
devised a way to give high visibility to a rat brain cancer called glioblastoma.
The researchers manipulated the cancer cells so that a gene called the
insulin-like growth factor, which is active in glioblastoma, was prevented from
working. The altered cells were then injected into rats that were also injected
with untreated brain cancer cells.

   Dr. Tykocinski said the rats' immune systems became alerted both to the
altered brain cancer cells and to the untreated brain cancer. In effect, he
said, the genetically altered cancer cells worked against the other cancer cells
like a vaccine works against infection.

   Though much more study is needed before the technique could be applied to
humans, Dr. Tykocinski said the system is a variation of gene therapy that
already has been applied to humans.

   If further study proves the technique feasible, he said, it could work like
this: A patient with brain cancer would undergo surgery and cells from the tumor
would be removed. Genes in the cells would be manipulated so that the growth
factor gene no longer worked. The altered cells then would be re-injected into
the patient.

   The altered cells would cause the patient's immune system to make antibodies
that then attack both the altered cells and any other brain tumor cells it could
find. In this way, Dr. Tykocinski said, the patient's own immune system kills
the tumor.

LOAD-DATE: January 1, 1993


                             1299 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1993 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                         January 1, 1993 Friday, THIRD

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A7

LENGTH: 421 words

HEADLINE: GENETICALLY ALTERED CELLS ATTACK BRAIN CANCER IN RATS

BYLINE: By PAUL RECER AP science writer

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   Researchers report that by altering certain genes in rat brain tumor cells
they have been able to turn on killer immune cells that seek out and attack
deadly brain cancers.

   In a study published today in the journal Science, researchers at Case
Western Reserve University report that genetically manipulated brain tumor cells
act rather like a cancer vaccine if they are reinjected into rats with brain
cancer.

   "The idea is to make the cancer cells more visible to the body's own immune
system," said Mark Tykocinski of the Case Western Institute of Pathology.

   The research was conducted on laboratory rats. Whether the technique can ever
be used on human brain cancer is still uncertain and will require additional
research, Tykocinski said.

   Cancer cells typically are almost invisible to the body's immune system, the
scientist said. Immune system cells that usually attack and kill invading
bacteria or other foreign cells usually will not touch cancer cells. Instead,
the cancer cells are treated like they belong in the body.

   Tykocinski said that to overcome this problem, he and his colleagues devised
a way to give high visibility to a type of rat brain cancer called glioblastoma.

   He said the researchers manipulated brain cancer cells so that a gene called
the insulin-like growth factor, or IGF-1, was prevented from working.  IGF-1 is
active in glioblastoma.

   The altered cells then were injected into rats that also were injected with
live brain cancer cells.

   Tykocinski said the rats' immune systems became alerted both to the altered
brain cancer cells and to the untreated brain cancer.

   In effect, he said, the genetically altered cancer cells worked against the
other cancer cells the same way a vaccine works against infection.

   Though more study is needed before the technique can be applied to humans,
Tykocinski said the system is a variation of gene therapy that already has been
applied to humans.

   If further study proves the technique feasible, he said, it could work like
this: A patient with brain cancer would undergo surgery, and cells from the
tumor would be removed. Genes in the cells would be manipulated so that the
IGF-1 gene no longer worked. The altered cells then would be reinjected into the
patient.

   The altered cells would cause the patient's immune system to make antibodies
that would attack both the altered cells and any other brain tumor cells it
could find. In this way, the patient's own immune system would kill the tumor,
Tykocinski said.

LOAD-DATE: July 24, 1993


                             1300 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1992 The Christian Science Publishing Society
                     Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)

                          December 30, 1992, Wednesday

SECTION: EVENTS; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 624 words

HEADLINE: EVENTS

BYLINE: Compiled by David Mutch

BODY:


   MUSLIMS PLAN ATTACK IN BOSNIA

   Ten thousand Muslim fighters have gathered on a strategic hill overlooking
Sarajevo amid rumors of an imminent Muslim assault to break the Serb siege of
the Bosnian capital. Mik Magnusson, a spokesman for the United Nations
Protection Forces in Sarajevo, said the buildup of troops had been taking place
for several months. Fighting in the city has intensified in the last two days.

Cubans defect to US

   A hijacked Cuban airliner with 53 people aboard flew into Miami International
Airport Dec. 29 and many requested political asylum, officials said. The plane
was an Aero Caribbean twin-engine turboprop, said a United States Customs
Service spokesman. It was flying from Havana to Varedero Beach on Cuba's north
coast.

Governor indicted

   Alabama's Gov. Guy Hunt was indicted Dec. 28 by a grand jury on charges of
taking $ 200,000 from his inaugural fund for personal use. He has reported to
the county jail. The 13-count felony indictment included charges of theft,
conspiracy, and ethics violations. It said Hunt conspired with his inaugural
fund accountant, Gene McKenzie, and two former aides.

Norwegian ship sabotaged

   The Sea Shepherd Conservation Society, an American environmentalist group
based in Los Angeles, has claimed responsibility for sabotaging a whaling ship
to protest Norway's decision to resume commercial whale hunting. Police said the
71-foot Nybraena was found nearly full of water Dec. 28 at its berth in the
Lofoten Islands above the Arctic Circle.

Gene therapy allowed

   Doctors in San Diego, Calif., say they have received unprecedented federal
approval for "compassionate use" of an unproven gene therapy on a patient. They
plan to administer genetically altered cells in the hope that the cells will
stimulate a natural immune response in the woman.

Vote to oust Panic

   Former communists and Nationalist allies of Serbian President Slobodan
Milosevic in Serbia's Parliament voted Dec. 29 to force Yugoslavia's moderate
premier, Milan Panic, out of office. This was the third effort to force Panic, a
Serb-born American millionaire, out of Yugoslav politics.

Deng 'man of year'

   Britain's respected Financial Times newspaper Dec. 29 named veteran Chinese
leader Deng Xiaoping as 1992 Man of the Year for his free-market reforms. It
said Deng's selection was more remarkable because his economic successes were
achieved "during the year in which he turned 88."

Chevron in Kazakhstan

   Chevron Corporation will begin developing Kazakhstan's huge Tengiz and
Korolyov oil fields next April, Itar-Tass news agency said Dec. 29. The Tengiz
field is said to be the biggest oil deposit discovered in the world in the past
decade.

Nuclear power in Russia

   Russia's top atomic energy official, Viktor Mikhailov, has pleaded for open
markets for his country's nuclear technology, promising to press ahead with
plans to double capacity for nuclear power.

Beijing retaliates

   China has ordered officials in Canton to cancel all contracts with France
related to the southern Chinese city's planned subway project, the
Beijing-funded newspaper Wen Wei Po reported Dec. 29. If true, the move would
represent the latest act of Chinese retaliation against France's reported
decision to sell 60 Mirage fighter jets to Taiwan.

Vote in Ghana

   Ghanaians voted Dec. 29 in the country's first democratic parliamentary
elections in 13 years despite a boycott by opposition candidates who contend
last month's presidential election was rigged. About 8 million people were
registered to vote. They chose from among 441 candidates competing for 178
parliamentary seats, according to the Interim National Electoral Commission.
Terms last four years.


LOAD-DATE: December 30, 1992, Wednesday


                             1301 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1992 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                   December 30, 1992, Wednesday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 3; Column 4; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 593 words

HEADLINE: USE OF UNPROVEN GENE THERAPY OKD BY U.S. FOR TUMOR PATIENT;
MEDICINE: THE UNPRECEDENTED FEDERAL DECISION WILL ALLOW TREATMENT OF A DYING SAN
DIEGO WOMAN'S BRAIN CANCER.

BYLINE: From Times Staff and Wire Reports

DATELINE: SAN DIEGO

BODY:

   Doctors say they have received unprecedented federal approval for
"compassionate use" of an unproven gene therapy on a woman dying of a brain
tumor.

   Dr. Ivor Royston, scientific director of the San Diego Regional Cancer
Center, said he plans to start the treatments Monday after researchers prepare
genetically altered cells to be injected into the patient.

   Researchers hope the cells will stimulate a natural immune response to attack
the cancer, which the woman's doctors describe as a virulent type of
glioblastoma that is uniformly fatal.

   The 51-year-old woman has undergone brain surgery twice, including the
removal of her entire right temporal lobe, three rounds of chemotherapy,
radiation therapy, and an experimental treatment with radioactive monoclonal
antibodies at Duke University, all without success. She is thought to have only
weeks to live. Her husband, a San Diego businessman, has asked that she remain
anonymous to preserve the family's privacy.

   Royston received a letter by fax Monday from Dr. Lance Liotta, deputy
director of the National Institutes of Health, informing him that agency
director Dr. Bernadine Healy had consented to the unproven gene-therapy
procedure.

   Tom Flavin, a spokesman for Healy, said that because the procedure was
considered safe -- and the Food and Drug Administration concurred -- the NIH
decided "that we would go ahead and give approval for this therapy to be given."

   The NIH had previously rejected Royston's application for a clinical trial of
the technique because he had not shown it to be effective in animals, but
Royston said it is worth the try anyway.

   "This is what we wanted all along," he said.

   Some members of the NIH Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee have expressed
concern that premature use of unproven therapies could expose patients to
unwarranted emotional harm or other risks.

   Healy reversed her earlier stated opposition to the compassionate waiver
after a meeting Monday with senior officials from the NIH, FDA and the U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services, which oversees both health agencies,
the patient's husband said.

   Royston and his colleague, Dr. Robert Sobol, plan to remove tumor cells from
the woman and add to them the gene for an anti-tumor agent called interleukin 2.
They hope that infusion of the cells back into her body will stimulate her
immune system to attack the engineered cells and other tumor cells through what
is called a "bystander effect."

   The first injection involving about a half-million cells is scheduled to be
administered at Sharp Memorial Hospital in La Jolla, where the woman's primary
physician is on staff, Royston said.

   She will receive progressively larger injections in her arm about every two
weeks, and can be at home between treatments.

   The case has received national attention because Sen. Tom Harkin (D-Iowa)
approached Healy in October and asked that a compassionate waiver be granted for
the woman, whose sister-in-law had worked in Harkin's senatorial campaign.
Harkin heads the Senate appropriations subcommittee that funds NIH. The
patient's husband has also served in four administrations, beginning with
President John F. Kennedy.

   Lorraine Voles, Harkin's press secretary, said Tuesday that Harkin did not
pressure Healy in any way into making this decision, and that he never even
referred to the specific case in requesting that the NIH establish a mechanism
for granting compassionate waivers. Voles acknowledged, however, that Harkin was
responding to requests for help from the patient's family.


                             1302 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



               December 30, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 915 words

HEADLINE: NEWS SUMMARY

BODY:


   International A2-9

ARMS TREATY TERMS SET
The U.S. and Russia agreed on a nuclear-arms-reduction treaty after Washington
compromised on three Russian demands. A summit meeting on the accord could take
place as early as this weekend.  A1
A FITTING BUT DELICATE BALANCE
The new strategic arms treaty aligns the U.S. and Russian weapons balance with
their relationship, but working out the details was neither automatic nor
uncomplicated.  A1
YUGOSLAV PREMIER OUSTED
Communists and nationalists combined forces in Yugoslavia's Parliament to oust
Prime Minister Milan Panic in an overwhelming no-confidence vote.  A1
WINTER SUFFERING IN SARAJEVO
Elderly Bosnians who have survived months under siege in Sarajevo are succumbing
to the hardships of winter, and U.N. peacekeeping officials are seeking relief
for them.  A6
BRAZIL'S PRESIDENT RESIGNS
Just minutes after the Brazilian Senate had begun an impeachment trial, Fernando
Collor de Mello resigned as President of Brazil. Vice President Itamar Franco
was sworn in as his successor.  A1
THE FLIP SIDE OF CORRUPTION
The new leader of Brazil inspires both confidence in a public looking for an
honest President and fears about what some perceive as an anachronistic economic
policy.  A8
CRIME GROWS IN SOMALI CAPITAL
Shootings, car thefts and other crimes are increasing in Mogadishusince American
troops arrived as tension toward the forces rises.  A3
KENYA GOES TO THE POLLS
Millions voted in elections for President and Parliament in Kenya, which has
been ruled for 14 years by President Daniel arap Moi. The vote is seen as a test
for multi-party politics in the region.  A3
BEIJING RESTRICTS KOREA TRADE
Beginning in the new year, all North Korean trade with China must be paid for in
cash, a measure that will handicap the smaller country, which has no hard
currency and is accustomed to bartering with China.  A2

The U.N. accused Khmer Rouge in death of 12 Vietnamese.  A2
Beirut rejected Israel's offer to permit aid to Palestinians.  A5
Jerusalem Journal: Unearthing a theological conundrum.  A4

National A10-12, B16

CUBAN AIRLINER DIVERTED TO MIAMI
The pilot of a Cuban commuter plane flew it to Miami, where all but 5 of the 53
people on board immediately requested political asylum.  A1
A BITTER WINTER WONDERLAND
A growing tourism boycott stemming from Colorado's adoption of an anti-gay
measure has done little to diminish the celebrity presence in Aspen this holiday
season but has done much to tarnish it.  A1
DRUG FROM RARE TREE APPROVED
After a review lasting only five months, the F.D.A. granted approval for the
marketing of Taxol, derived from the Pacific yew tree, as a treatment of ovarian
cancer.  A10
An injectable drug to treat migraines won F.D.A. backing.  A10
An unproven gene therapy is being allowed in a cancer case.  A12
SURGE IN WEST'S POPULATION
Rapid population growth in Western states and a level of immigration unequaled
in almost eight decades have pushed the nation's population to 256.6 million as
a new year approaches.  A12
'STATE GOVERNMENT GOES ON'
The day after being indicted on charges of theft and conspiracy, the Governor of
Alabama pointedly tried to proceed with business as usual, working at his desk
and announcing the appointment of two judges.  A10
HOME ALONE, IN FACT
 An Illinois couple who left their two young children by themselves and flew to
Mexico on a nine-day vacation were arrested on child-abandonment charges when
they landed at Chicago on a return flight.  A10
FIVE SLAIN IN A SPREE OF VIOLENCE
Five people were killed and four were wounded in what the police in Dayton,
Ohio, describe as a spree of "joy killing" by four youths there late last week.
A12
Education Page B6
A public-school teacher who teaches his own children at home.
With a group's help, a Bronx school undertakes self-renewal.
Campus Journal: Tarnish for a once-proud marching band.


Metro Digest B1

CLEMENCY FOR JEAN HARRIS
Only hours before Jean S. Harris underwent coronary bypass surgery, Governor
Cuomo commuted the sentence she received in the 1980 murder of her lover, Dr.
Herman Tarnower.  A1
SHARING WARMTH, AND LIVES
The tiny society of Harvest House, where six elderly people and one nun live
together, is an experiment in communal living for old people, part of the
patchwork of long-term living alternatives for elderly Americans.  A1

Business Digest D1

The Living Section C1-5
 Discovering something new in food: pleasure.  C1
The Quilted Giraffe joins
the dinosaurs.  C1
Health Page C6
What really works for getting out of a bad mood?

Arts/Entertainment C7-15
High-tech art for Chase Bank.  C7
Perilous times for the Czech Philharmonic.  C7
Film: "Lorenzo's Oil." C7

Sports B7-12
Basketball: Knicks topple Pacers.  B7
Column: Berkow on the year in sports.  B7
Golf: Daly to enter treatment clinic.B7
Hockey: Rangers lose in overtime.  B7
Islanders fall to Maple Leafs.  B9
Obituaries A12-13
Ernest W. Hahn, innovative builder of malls.  A12
Vivienne Segal, musical-comedy star.  A13

Editorials/Op-Ed A14-15
Editorials
A farewell to MIRV's.
New course for City University.
Eighties, Nineties and Oh's.
One China, plus democracy.
Letters
Charles S. Maier: Germany's split personality.
Charlotte Wagner: Reluctant witness.
Sasha Alyson: Fear of the rainbow.

Neediest Cases B4

LOAD-DATE: December 30, 1992


                             1303 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



               December 30, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 12; Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 299 words

HEADLINE: Patient to Get Gene Therapy

BYLINE: AP

DATELINE: SAN DIEGO, Dec. 29

BODY:

   The National Institutes of Health for the first time has consented to a
compassionate plea from doctors to use an unproven gene therapy on a woman dying
from a brain tumor, officials said Monday.

   Dr. Ivor Royston, scientific director at the San Diego Regional Cancer
Center, said he planned to start the treatments after researchers prepare
genetically altered cells to be injected into the patient.

    Researchers hope the cells will stimulate a natural immune response to
attack the cancer, which the woman's doctors describe as a virulent type that is
almost always fatal.

   Surgery, chemotherapy and radiation treatments have been tried without
success on the 51-year-old woman. Her husband, a San Diego businessman, has
asked that she remain anonymous to preserve the family's privacy.

   Dr. Royston and his colleague, Dr. Robert Sobol, plan to inject the woman
with her own cells that have been altered to contain a gene for interleukin 2, a
protein the scientists believe is crucial for attracting added quantities of the
immune system's T cells.

   Doctors hope that putting those T cells in the woman's bloodstream would
allow them to circulate in the brain and attack her tumor. She will receive
progressively larger injections in her arm about every two weeks.

   Dr. Royston received a fax Monday from Dr. Lance Liotta, deputy director of
the National Institutes of Health, informing him that the agency's director, Dr.
Bernadine Healy, had consented to the unproven procedure.

   Though he has no evidence the woman will benefit from the gene therapy, Dr.
Royston said it was worth the try.

   The institutes had scheduled a hearing on the matter for Jan. 8. Dr. Royston
had argued that waiting until the hearing could jeopardize the woman's health if
her tumor continued to grow.


LOAD-DATE: December 30, 1992


                             1304 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1992 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                  December 30, 1992, Wednesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 620 words

HEADLINE: GOLDEN GLOBES

BYLINE: Mike Snider

BODY:

    For those anxiously awaiting Academy Award nominations, here's something to
tide you over - nominees for the 50th annual Golden Globe Awards.  For best
dramatic picture: A Few Good Men, The Crying Game, Howards End, Scent of a Woman
and Unforgiven. Best musical or comic movie: Aladdin, Enchanted April, Honeymoon
in Vegas, The Player and Sister Act. Best dramatic actress: Emma Thompson,
Howards End; Mary McDonnell, Passion Fish; Michelle Pfeiffer, Love Field; Susan
Sarandon, Lorenzo's Oil; and Sharon Stone, Basic Instinct. Best dramatic actor:
Tom Cruise, A Few Good Men; Robert Downey Jr., Chaplin; Jack Nicholson, Hoffa;
Al Pacino, Scent of a Woman; and Denzel Washington, Malcolm X. Best musical or
comic actress: Geena Davis, A League of Their Own; Whoopi Goldberg, Sister Act;
Shirley MacLaine, Used People; Miranda Richardson, Enchanted April; and Meryl
Streep, Death Becomes Her. Best musical or comic actor: Nicolas Cage, Honeymoon
in Vegas; Billy Crystal, Mr. Saturday Night; Marcello Mastroianni, Used People;
and Tim Robbins, with two nominations, for The Player and Bob Roberts. The
awards, voted by members of the Hollywood Foreign Press Association, will be
presented Jan. 23.

 SUPER SUPERS: Next, four finalists for National Superintendent of the Year,
sponsored by the American Association of School Administrators. They are Brian
L. Benzel , Edmonds School District, Lynnwood , Wash.; Kenneth S. Burnley ,
Colorado Springs School District 11, Colorado Springs, Colo.; Noel T. Farmer
Jr., Frederick County Public Schools, Frederick, Md.; and Joe A. Lopez, Cuba
Independent Schools, Cuba, N.M. And the winner is ... to be announced Jan. 12 in
Washington, D.C.

 BAD HAIR YEAR: The best celebrity hairstyle of 1992 is the two-story purple
beehive sported by cartoon character Marge Simpson. So says John Amico,
president of We Care Hair Salons, a national franchise, who has issued a list of
the best and worst hairstyles of the stars. Others on Amico's best list: Joan
Jett, Alec Baldwin, Julia Roberts, Cher, Bill Clinton, Al Pacino, Robert
Redford, ''Kramer'' (Michael Richards) from Seinfeld and Al Gore. On the worst
list: Michael Milken, Axl Rose, Barbara Bush, Sam Donaldson, Barbara Walters,
Burt Reynolds, Michael Bolton, Whoopi Goldberg, David Letterman and Tipper Gore.


 ICE CUBE: Finally - for the contestant who has everything - the January issue
of Omni, out now, offers readers a chance to be put in cryonic suspension, or
frozen, minutes after death. On page 43 of the futuristic mag, participants are
asked to write in 250 words or less, ''why you should be selected for possible
revival in the future.''

 TUMOR THERAPY: For the first time, the National Institutes of Health has
approved an unproven gene therapy experiment for compassionate use. A 51-year-
old San Diego woman dying from a brain tumor starts getting injections of her
own genetically altered T-cells next Monday. Doctors hope the cells stimulate an
immune response that attacks the tumor. Surgery, chemotherapy and radiation
treatments have failed. NIH director Dr. Bernadine Healy approved the treatment
after a meeting Monday with other Health Department officials.

 FIRST TIMERS: College causes more anxiety in students who are the first family
member to go than it does in other students, says a study by Pennsylvania State
University. When asked, 132 freshmen at four schools said family support was
important. But parents were ''a source of stress,'' too, for those who were the
first in the family to attend, says coordinator Patrick Terenzini . ''These
students were actually breaking family tradition,'' he says, and parents thought
this might change their relationships.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, color, David Lee

CUTLINE: WASHINGTON: Up for a Golden Globe


                             1305 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1992 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           December 29, 1992 Tuesday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A-1

LENGTH: 722 words

HEADLINE: La Jolla gene therapy wins federal consent;
First injection for brain-tumor patient is set for Monday

BYLINE: DAVID GRAHAM, Staff Writer

BODY:

   La Jolla physicians have received unprecedented federal approval for the
"compassionate use" of an unproven gene therapy to treat a woman dying of a
brain tumor. Dr. Ivor Royston, scientific director of the San Diego Regional
Cancer Center, said he plans to start the treatment Monday, as soon as
genetically altered cells can be readied for injection.

   Researchers hope the cells will stimulate a natural immune response to attack
the cancer. "It will be the first gene therapy in San Diego," Royston said.
Royston said he received word yesterday afternoon that the director of the
National Institutes of Health (NIH), Dr. Bernadine Healy, had consented to the
procedure. "Dr. Healy has approved your compassionate plea request for a
single-patient gene therapy," Dr. Lance Liotta, NIH deputy director, wrote in a
letter sent by fax.

   Efforts to reach Liotta for comment were unsuccessful. The expedited NIH
authorization, coming 11 days before a Jan. 8 hearing to consider the matter,
represents the first approval of gene therapy for compassionate use. "This is
what we wanted all along," Royston said. "I'm extremely excited about it," the
patient's husband said. Royston had argued that waiting until the NIH hearing
could jeopardize the woman's health if her tumor continued to grow. Some members
of the NIH's Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee have expressed concern that
allowing the premature use of unproven therapies could expose patients to
unwarranted emotional or other harm.

   The hearing still will take place, Royston said Liotta told him. Royston's
Dec. 7 query to Healy about compassionate use posed difficulties for NIH
regulators of gene therapy.

   They had no procedures for considering such a plea when conventional
treatments had failed. Despite surgery, chemotherapy and radiation treatments,
the 51-year-old patient's tumor remains, her doctors say.

   It is a virulent type that is almost always fatal, they add. The woman is not
being identified here at the request of her husband, a San Diego businessman,
who said he wants to preserve the family's privacy. The husband said Healy
apparently gave her approval following a meeting yesterday morning among senior
officials of the NIH, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA), which also
regulates gene therapy, and the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
(HHS), which oversees both health agencies. The husband said a friend, whom he
declined to identify, had approached an assistant secretary of HHS about somehow
securing NIH approval faster. Health and Human Services officials left
yesterday's meeting convinced the NIH should let the compassionate use proceed
promptly, the husband said. The FDA already had given its approval. Royston has
said he has no evidence the treatment will help the woman, but he says the
smallest chance is worth the try. With his colleague, Dr. Robert Sobol, Royston
plans to give the patient injections of her own cells that have been altered to
contain a gene for interleukin 2, a protein that the scientists believe is
crucial for attracting increased quantities of the immune system's cytotoxic T
cells. Doctors hope these T cells in the blood stream would then circulate in
the brain and attack the woman's tumor. The first injection, a drop of some
half-million cells, will be administered at Sharp Memorial Hospital, where the
woman's primary physician, Dr. Thomas Shiftan, is on staff, Royston said.

   She will receive additional and progressively larger injections in her arm
about every two weeks and can be at home during the intervals. The cells that
will be transplanted are frozen now, Royston said.

   They must be thawed and inspected for safety, with the results reported to
the FDA prior to injection, he said. Royston said he had expected for some time
to be the first doctor in San Diego to use gene therapy. "I kept my word after
all," Royston said, adding he did not expect his first use to be a
compassionate-plea case. He and Sobol had sought approval for a very similar
gene therapy in November 1991, but action on their proposal was deferred until
they could present the results of more tests on animals. About two dozen gene
therapy treatments have been approved by the NIH and are in experimental use
against a range of conditions, from skin cancer to brain tumors to deficiencies
of the immune system.

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                             1306 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1992 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                           December 28, 1992, Monday

SECTION: LOCAL NEWS; Section C; Page 1

LENGTH: 966 words

HEADLINE: A child waits for life-giving phone call

BYLINE: By Andy Miller STAFF WRITERchildren; health; conditions; charities; aid;
hospitals

BODY:

   Transplant nightmare: The family runs a maze of bills, insurance hikes,
regulations - and financial turmoil.

   The phone call for Martin could come any day.

   When it comes, the 9-year-old, along with his mother and sister, will have to
pack up and move to Chapel Hill, N.C., leaving Martin's father behind in the
small South Georgia town of Smithville.

   They don't have a choice.

   The move would bring Martin Alexander Jr., a cystic fibrosis patient, close
to the University of North Carolina Hospitals, so he can be rushed there when a
dead donor provides the lungs he needs to sustain life.

   For him, such urgent journeys have become as standard as running and jumping
are for healthier kids. Weekly, Martin and his mother drive four hours to
Egleston Children's Hospital in Atlanta for a day's treatment. Or for longer
stays: He has been hospitalized every month since 1991. Even Christmas week.

   All the while, the family has had to steer through a maze of bills, higher
insurance costs, government regulations - and financial turmoil.

   Like the Alexanders, thousands of Americans with serious health problems have
jousted with the health-care system. They, too, have grappled with astronomical
bills and constant worry about coverage.

   At times, those struggles have been as frustrating for the Alexanders as the
daily fight to clear Martin's lungs.

   Yet this family are fighters. Despite the life-threatening nature of his
disease, Martin has kept a positive attitude, says his mom, Becky Alexander.

   "Doctor C" - that's Dr. Daniel Caplan of Egleston - says of Martin:

   "He's like a magnet. Everybody comes from other floors of the hospital to see
him when he's there. He's a very vibrant kid.

   "He has a very dedicated family."

   They've had to be, considering:

   Their monthly insurance premiums have shot up hundreds of dollars per month
at annual renewal time, Mrs. Alexander says.

   Those insurance bills, a year ago, drove Martin Sr.'s farming business into
bankruptcy.

   None of Georgia's hospitals offers lung transplants now, though Egleston and
Emory aim to have programs running in early 1993. That's the reason for the trek
to North Carolina.

   Another kink stems from Medicaid. Funded by states and the federal
government, that program assists families and individuals with low income.

   Martin's family receives Medicaid. But Georgia's program doesn't cover lung
transplants, while more than 20 states do, with qualifications.

   Georgia Medicaid doesn't cover them because they're considered an
"experimental procedure," says Russ Toal, commissioner of the Department of
Medical Assistance.

   "If someone has evidence, and Medicare and other insurance no longer
considers this experimental, they need to send this evidence to our office," he
says.

   But officials of cystic fibrosis organizations, transplant agencies, Medicaid
officials in other states, and doctors insist the transplants have moved beyond
the experimental stage, citing improved success rates.

   "We don't consider them experimental procedures; that's a term tossed around
by insurance companies," says Mary Ann Wirtz of the United Network for Organ
Sharing, which represents transplant surgeons and collects data on all
transplant procedures.

   Cystic fibrosis is a rare, inherited disorder occurring in about one in every
2,000 live births and affecting the pancreas and respiratory system. The cause
is unknown. As children grow older, their bronchial tubes can become
increasingly blocked, making breathing extremely difficult. There is no cure.
About half the children afflicted with severe CF die in their late teens.

   In recent years, lung transplants have been held out as a hope for longer
life spans for those afflicted with the condition, but the long- term survival
for most patients after lung transplantation remains unknown.

   In many ways, Martin is like other boys his age. He collects baseball cards
and lit up last week when Atlanta Hawks Stacey Augmon, Jon Koncak and Morlon
Wiley visited his room and others in Egleston.

   But his condition is anything but normal. Martin has been homebound for more
than a year now. And like other CF patients, several times a day he has someone
(mom, usually) pound on his back and chest to force up mucus lodged in his
lungs.

   Then there are the IVs, which make his bedroom "look like a hospital room,"
Mrs. Alexander says.

   Recently, his lungs have been helped by a trial drug, DNase, which has freed
him from being oxygen-dependent.

   But even breakthrough drugs - and promising, experimental gene therapy -
can't reverse the damage to his lungs. That's where transplants come in - for
cases of critical need, medical officials say. What new lungs can do is to
prolong his life - and make it more livable.

   "We can add years - good years," says Jeanette Thompson of the UNC Hospitals,
which has performed transplants on 27 cystic fibrosis patients, with just three
deaths.

   "It's a new quality of life for them," says Robert Beall of the Cystic
Fibrosis Foundation.

   But the procedure is costly. At least $ 150,000, says Ms. Thompson. Then
there are the relocation and living expenses in North Carolina, the
pre-operation program, the post-op programs and the anti-rejection drugs (at
least $ 1,000 per month) that Martin must take for the rest of his life.

   Insurance might help with some transplant costs, but the family policy has no
caps on the amount the family must pay, Mrs. Alexander says. Meanwhile, the
premiums alone account for more than their house and car payments put together.

   "It's hard to go through that without being bitter," she says.

   But the family's spirit has endured, despite ordeals such as attending the
recent funeral of a CF patient who was a friend of Martin's.

   "I think," Mrs. Alexander says, "Martin's a little trouper."

LOAD-DATE: January 5, 1993


                             1307 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1992 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            December 27, 1992 Sunday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-2

LENGTH: 382 words

HEADLINE: Hearing moved up on cancer therapy

BYLINE: DAVID GRAHAM, Staff Writer

BODY:

   Federal health officials have moved up the date they'll hear a request by La
Jolla physicians to use an unproven gene therapy technique to treat a woman who
has a terminal brain tumor. The hearing has been rescheduled for Jan. 8, almost
a week earlier than the original Jan. 14 date set by officials at the National
Institutes of Health (NIH) in Bethesda, Md., doctors said. "That's better," said
Dr. Ivor Royston, scientific director of the San Diego Regional Cancer Center
and the physician who is seeking to use the treatment. Royston said he welcomed
the news because it would allow doctors to begin treating the woman sooner, if
they secure NIH approval. Royston said he was notified of the change in a letter
sent to him by fax. Efforts to reach NIH officials were unsuccessful yesterday.

   But Dr. Robert Sobol, who is seeking the permission along with Royston, said
NIH officials had indicated they wanted to proceed faster given the seriousness
of the woman's condition. Sobol and Royston are seeking a "compassionate use"
exemption to try a gene therapy technique that has not been fully reviewed and
approved by the NIH. They want to treat the brain tumor in the San Diego woman,
51, for whom all conventional treatments have been exhausted.

   The type of brain tumor is almost always fatal. The NIH's Recombinant DNA
Advisory Committee, which monitors the emerging field of medicine involving the
transplant of genes, must grapple with the issue of whether the most remote hope
of benefit from the technique outweighs any potential emotional, physical or
economic harm from trying it prematurely. The Food and Drug Administration,
which regulates medical treatments including gene therapy, already has approved
Royston's "compassionate plea" use of the therapy. Royston and Sobol's approach
involves stimulating a natural immune response to attack the tumor. They want to
give the woman an injection of her own cells that have been altered to contain a
gene for interleukin 2, a protein that the scientists believe is crucial for
attracting the immune system's cytotoxic T cells. They hope these T cells in the
blood stream would circulate in the brain and attack the tumor. The woman's
husband, a San Diego businessman, has asked that the family not be identified by
name in media reports.

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                             1308 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1992 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           December 26, 1992 Saturday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-7:2; B-6:3

LENGTH: 556 words

HEADLINE: Doctors seek permission to use gene therapy on cancer patient

BYLINE: DAVID GRAHAM, Staff Writer

BODY:

   The National Institutes of Health has called an emergency meeting for next
month to consider a request by La Jolla physicians seeking special permission to
use unproven gene therapy to treat a woman with brain cancer. Approval from the
NIH is the last regulatory hurdle doctors from the San Diego Regional Cancer
Center must surmount.

   The Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee (RAC), which reviews gene therapy
procedures, will meet Jan. 14. "We've scheduled the RAC meeting on an emergency
basis," NIH spokesman Tom Flavin said.

   "A process that usually takes months we're going to accomplish in two weeks."
But Dr. Ivor Royston, scientific director of the cancer center, questioned
whether his 51-year-old patient would still be alive by the time the panel
meets. "The decision . . . could have been made two weeks ago," Royston said.
Royston is seeking permission for the so-called compassionate use of a gene
therapy that has not been fully reviewed and approved by the NIH. All
conventional treatments have failed.

   The woman's type of brain tumor is almost always fatal. The woman's husband,
a San Diego businessman, described the NIH timetable as outrageous.

   "It's totally inadequate," he said.

   The family is not being identified to preserve its privacy. The husband said
he is considering other, faster means of securing NIH approval, but he declined
to specify what they might be. Asked whether the secretary of Health and Human
Services, Dr. Louis Sullivan, might be asked to intervene, Royston declined to
comment.

   Iowa Sen. Tom Harkin previously wrote to the NIH director, Dr. Bernadine
Healy, urging consideration. Royston also wrote to Healy Dec. 7 asking for swift
action.

   The request from Royston and his colleague, Dr. Robert Sobol, presents the
NIH with regulatory problems, officials acknowledge, for the agency lacks a
procedure for considering such appeals in the area of gene therapy. The U.S.
Food and Drug Administration already has approved Royston's request.

   The NIH's approval is vital because the private cancer center receives
federal research grants that could be withdrawn if doctors proceed without
permission. The NIH regulators will consider whether the possibility of the
tiniest benefit from the treatment is worth the risk of harm, emotional or
otherwise, to the patient.

   The meeting's timing complies with regulations that require a 15-day notice
to the public, Flavin said. The NIH's attorney has advised Healy that she does
not have authority to grant approval without the panel's review, Flavin said.

   Royston disputes that, suggesting the director may have leeway. In November
1991, Royston sought NIH approval for a gene therapy approach similar to the one
he proposes to use now.

   The panel deferred action, asking for additional animal studies to
demonstrate the technique's effectiveness.

   Royston says he plans to resubmit data and seek approval in 1993 for that
therapy. Royston and Sobol's therapy involves stimulating a natural immune
response to attack the tumor.

   If they gain permission, doctors plan to give the woman an injection of her
own cells that have been altered to contain a gene for interleukin 2, a protein
that the scientists believe is crucial for attracting the immune system's
cytotoxic T-cells.

   They hope these T-cells in the bloodstream would then circulate in the brain
and attack the tumor.

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                             1309 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                         Copyright 1992 Star Tribune
                         Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)

                     December 26, 1992, Saint Paul Edition

SECTION: News; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 481 words

HEADLINE: His business is blowing up;
 But the venture, which is on the rise, will deflate after the holidays

BYLINE: Mary Lynn Smith; Staff Writer

BODY:

    Most high school students with after-school jobs usually work for someone
else. Not Joe Urban. While many high school students are flipping burgers after
school, the 18-year-old Eagan High School senior is blowing up balloons at his
own store.

    Urban opened his business, All In A Balloon, last month in the Burnsville
Center and plans to close it next Wednesday. Like many temporary businesses that
sprout during the holiday season, Urban wants to take advantage of the annual
holiday spending spree. But Urban's venture is more than a business opportunity
- it's a school project.

    Finding himself bored at high school, he enrolled this year in the mentor
program at Dakota County Technical College.  The program attracts some of the
top juniors and seniors from high schools in the southern suburbs of the Twin
Cities.

    Elizabeth Jenner, coordinator of the program, said participants receive high
school credit, experience and a chance for realistic evaluation of career goals.

    Each of the program's 11 students has a mentor who guides him or her through
projects in fields as diverse as gene therapy research, paleontology,
sportscasting and small business.

    Urban's interest in small business isn't unique, but Jenner believes he's
taken it to a new level by opening a business alongside major retailers.

    Last year, Urban expanded cleaning duties at his parents' computer business
into an office cleaning business.

    "The business went OK for a while, but the money wasn't all that great,"
Urban said. He worked two hours a night, five days a week, and netted $ 150 to $
200 a month. He needed more clients if he wanted to boost his profits.

    But potential clients didn't seem to be interested when they found out how
young he was, said Urban, who dresses up his jeans with a dress shirt and tie.

    Urban intended to work on the cleaning business while enrolled in the mentor
program but changed his mind after he browsed for business ideas at a small
business and opportunity show at the Minneapolis Convention Center this year.
With money earned primarily from his cleaning business (funds he had planned to
use to buy a truck), Urban invested it in his new business. He's counting on the
last-minute Christmas rush to let him at least break even on the venture.

    In the meantime, Urban fits shop-tending duties around his regular early
morning workouts, school and homework.

    "This has had its good points and bad points," he said. "I like the
challenge of trying to make it work. I like being in control. The money is a
good part. And I'm learning loads - like how to deal with people and negotiate."

    But Urban said he also is counting on closing shop at the end of the month.
"I wouldn't have done this if it would have lasted more than two months."


GRAPHIC: Photograph

LOAD-DATE: December 29, 1992


                             1310 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1992 The Buffalo News
                            Buffalo News (New York)



                    December 25, 1992, Friday, City Edition

SECTION: EDITORIAL PAGE; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 520 words

HEADLINE: GENETICS STALKS A KILLER;
 CYSTIC FIBROSIS MAY BE EARLY VICTIM OF GENE THERAPY

BODY:

    THERE IS encouraging news in the field of genetic research that's worthy of
being shared on this Christmas Day. A world weary from violence, poverty and
hunger needs all the good news it can get.

   In the early months of next year, it is expected there will be trials on
humans of at least two promising gene-therapy processes that have the potential
for curing cystic fibrosis.

   Cystic fibrosis is the most common deadly inherited disease. Thick mucus
builds up in the patient's lungs, leading to chronic bacterial infections.
Eventually, the lungs give out and the patient dies for lack of breathing
capacity. The body doesn't work without lungs. Cystic fibrosis is a long road to
a certain end.

   There is no cure available now. About 30,000 Americans are afflicted at any
one time by this killer. Many die before they turn 30.

   The news is that the federal committee that oversees gene-therapy research
has approved the human trial plans of two research groups and is likely to
approve a third. All three try to insert into the patient's body sturdy copies
of an important gene that the bodies lack. When functioning right, this gene
causes cells to create a protein that controls salt flow in the body. With the
gene missing, it is excessive salt that
 causes the mucus that leads eventually to death.

   The three research groups will insert the missing gene in a cold virus that
has been fixed so it cannot reproduce. The virus will be delivered to the nose
and lungs of the patient in two of the plans, while only nasal application will
be involved in the more conservative process. Tests on animals have been
successful, but researchers cannot know whether they have found a cure until the
processes are tried on humans.

   Plans call for bringing together about 30 patients, all over 21, for early
trials. One volunteer may be the 24-year-old son of the president and chief
executive officer of the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation. The volunteers face risks,
but since a lethal disease inhabits their bodies, it is clearly a risk worth
taking, both for their own sake and for the sake of future victims.

   Scientists warn against high expectations. After all, their trials may not be
successful. Even if early trials work well, it will still be about six years
before gene therapy is commonly available to the afflicted. But why not cheer a
bit? There may come a time soon when people who now die at an early age from a
sure killer can enjoy a full life expectancy -- and merry Christmases well
beyond age 30.

LOAD-DATE: December 30, 1992


                             1311 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1992 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           December 24, 1992 Thursday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-1:4,8,9; B-2:1,6

LENGTH: 559 words

HEADLINE: Emergency use of gene therapy sought

BYLINE: DAVID GRAHAM, Staff Writer

BODY:

   The National Institutes of Health has called an emergency meeting for next
month to consider a request by La Jolla physicians seeking special permission to
use unproven gene therapy to treat a woman with brain cancer. Approval from the
NIH is the last regulatory hurdle doctors from the San Diego Regional Cancer
Center must surmount.

   The Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee (RAC), which reviews gene therapy
procedures, will meet Jan. 14. "We've scheduled the RAC meeting on an emergency
basis," NIH spokesman Tom Flavin said yesterday.

   "A process that usually takes months we're going to accomplish in two weeks."
But Dr. Ivor Royston, scientific director of the cancer center, questioned
whether his 51-year-old patient would still be alive by the time the panel
meets. "The decision we got today could have been made two weeks ago," Royston
said. Royston is seeking permission for the "compassionate use" of a gene
therapy that has not been fully reviewed and approved by the NIH. All
conventional treatments have failed.

   The woman's type of brain tumor is almost always fatal. The woman's husband,
a San Diego businessman, yesterday described the NIH timetable as outrageous.

   "It's totally inadequate," he said.

   The family is not being identified to preserve its privacy. The husband said
he is considering other, faster means of securing NIH approval, but he declined
to specify what they might be. Asked whether the secretary of Health and Human
Services, Dr. Louis Sullivan, might be asked to intervene, Royston declined to
comment.

   Iowa Sen. Tom Harkin previously wrote to the NIH director, Dr. Bernadine
Healy, urging consideration. Royston also wrote to Healy Dec. 7 asking for swift
action.

   The request from Royston and his colleague, Dr. Robert Sobol, presents the
NIH with regulatory problems, officials acknowledge, for the agency lacks a
procedure for considering such appeals in the area of gene therapy. The U.S.
Food and Drug Administration already has approved Royston's request.

   The NIH's approval is vital because the private cancer center receives
federal research grants that could be withdrawn if doctors proceed without
permission. The NIH regulators will consider whether the possibility of the
tiniest benefit from the treatment is worth the risk of harm, emotional or
otherwise, to the patient.

   The meeting's timing complies with regulations that require a 15-day notice
to the public, Flavin said. The NIH's attorney has advised Healy that she does
not have authority to grant approval without the panel's review, Flavin said.

   Royston disputes that, suggesting the director may have leeway. In November
1991, Royston sought NIH approval for a gene therapy approach similar to the one
he proposes to use now.

   The panel deferred action, asking for additional animal studies to
demonstrate the technique's effectiveness.

   Royston says he plans to resubmit data and seek approval in 1993 for that
therapy. Royston and Sobol's therapy involves stimulating a natural immune
response to attack the tumor.

   If they gain permission, doctors plan to give the woman an injection of her
own cells that have been altered to contain a gene for interleukin 2, a protein
that the scientists believe is crucial for attracting the immune system's
cytotoxic T-cells.

   They hope these T-cells in the bloodstream would then circulate in the brain
and attack the tumor.

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                             1312 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1992 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           December 19, 1992 Saturday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-8

LENGTH: 570 words

HEADLINE: 1 of 2 bureaus OKs gene therapy for dying woman

BYLINE: DAVID GRAHAM, Staff Writer

BODY:

   La Jolla doctors received permission from the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration Wednesday to try an unproven gene therapy technique on a woman
who may otherwise die of a brain tumor. The compassionate-use exemption granted
by the FDA moves researchers at the San Diego Regional Cancer Center an
important step closer to actually using the experimental treatment. The other
federal agency that regulates the use of gene therapy, the National Institutes
of Health, is still considering the request and may reach a decision soon,
officials say. The FDA decision represents the first time gene therapy, the
treatment of disease with transplanted genes, has been approved on a
compassionate-use basis, officials say.

   Such pleas for the use of novel treatments are sometimes granted by the FDA
when other, conventional methods have been tried and failed. Ivor Royston, the
scientific director at the cancer center who is seeking the exemption, said he
was informed of the decision by Dr. Alex Kuta, who reviews "investigational new
drugs" at the FDA. Kuta could not be reached for comment yesterday. While
Royston welcomed the FDA decision, he said he is not prepared to say how he
would proceed if the NIH does not approve his request.

   The NIH could withhold federal grants to Royston's center if he were to use
the therapy without its sanction. Royston's request is seen as forcing the two
federal agencies to develop protocols for the expeditious handing of
compassionate pleas in gene therapy where they did not exist before. Members of
a panel that advises the NIH on gene therapy have said that there may be room
for allowing compassionate pleas, but of limited sorts, and in cases where the
treatment in question has already been reviewed in public by the committee and
approved. An ethicist not serving on the regulatory bodies, Arthur Caplan,
director of the Center for Biomedical Ethics at the University of Minnesota,
said in a recent interview that such pleas must be considered carefully.

   He believes researchers need to produce evidence that their efforts are
actually compassionate and not driven by ego or other motives. If doctors at the
San Diego center are allowed to proceed, it would be about two weeks, Royston
said, before they could deliver the genetically altered cells that they hope
will stimulate immune cells to attack the woman's brain tumor, a virulent type
that is almost always fatal. The patient, 51, already has been treated with
surgery, chemotherapy and radiation, said her husband, a San Diego businessman.

   Royston said his patient's tumor has grown by 30 percent in the past two
weeks. The husband has asked that the family not be identified to preserve their
privacy. "Our thoughts are quite positive," the husband said of the FDA ruling
yesterday. Royston acknowledged, however, that the chances his gene therapy will
help the woman are remote. "I don't have any high expectation for this," Royston
said, adding that it is nonetheless worth a try as the only way to know if it
does help. Royston's approach involves an injection of genetically altered cells
in an arm or thigh.

   Doctors plan to give the patient back her own cells that have been altered to
contain a gene for interleukin 2, a protein that the scientists believe is
crucial for attracting the immune system's cytotoxic T cells.

   They hope these T cells in the blood stream would then circulate in the brain
and attack the tumor.

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                             1313 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1992 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           December 19, 1992 Saturday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-1

LENGTH: 496 words

HEADLINE: Hopes rise here for anti-AIDS vaccine

BYLINE: CRAIG D. ROSE, Staff Writer

BODY:

   Immune Response Corp.'s pursuit of a vaccine treatment for AIDS appeared to
get a boost this week from reports of success with a similar approach to a
disease in monkeys. James Glavin, chief executive officer of the San Diego-based
company, said this week's report supports the premise that vaccines can fight
AIDS. But he emphasized there are distinctions between the study involving
monkeys and his company's efforts. Immune Response is trying to develop a
vaccine treatment for patients with the HIV virus, which causes AIDS. The
company, co-founded by Dr. Jonas Salk, calls its product an immunotherapeutic.
Researchers at Harvard Medical Center's New England Regional Primate Center
reported encouraging results this week in preventing an HIV-like infection in
rhesus monkeys, using a weakened virus.

   The work, which uses a traditional vaccine approach, was reported in the
journal Science. Traditional vaccines introduce killed or weakened viruses into
people to rally their immune systems and prevent infection. "The results of
their work is neither favorable nor unfavorable for our efforts, but it's
related in that both are taking a vaccine approach," said Glavin. If the data
from Immune Response's recently completed human trials are positive, the company
plans to apply by next summer for Food and Drug Administration clearance to
market the treatment.

   Analysts say there may be strong pressure for approval. "If they have
anything that looks like it works, they will get approval because people with
HIV infection have a death sentence," said Cynthia Robbins-Roth, editor in chief
of BioVenture Publications in San Mateo, an industry publishing and research
company. Adding to the pressure for approval, say analysts, is that Immune
Response could be the first to apply for approval of such an AIDS treatment.
Glavin said there was little enthusiasm for vaccines in AIDS research when
Immune Response began its efforts about five years ago.

   Most efforts launched then involved genetic engineering of organisms to rally
the immune system, he said. Now at least six other companies are pursuing
development of vaccines for AIDS, Glavin said. "We feel pretty good about the
assumptions we made and how the whole industry has evolved," he said.

   "We took the road less traveled." Immune Response's technical approach has
been to use a live form of HIV with the outer surface -- known as the envelope
-- of the virus removed. That approach could eliminate the problem of developing
a treatment for a rapidly mutating virus like HIV. "The core of the virus --
which we use -- does not mutate," Glavin said. "It is the envelope of the virus
that mutates."

   Immune Response is betting that by using the core of the virus, it can rally
the immune system to fight all varieties of HIV. Immune Response employs 73
people, plus 17 at a recently acquired subsidiary in Connecticut which is trying
to develop gene therapy. The company's stock closed yesterday at $17.50, down 75
cents.

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                             1314 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1992 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            December 18, 1992 Friday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-1:1,4,5,6; B-4:2

LENGTH: 721 words

HEADLINE: 1 of 2 groups OKs therapy for woman

BYLINE: DAVID GRAHAM, Staff Writer

BODY:

   La Jolla doctors received permission from the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration yesterday to try an unproven gene therapy technique on a woman
who may otherwise die of a brain tumor. The compassionate-use exemption granted
by the FDA moves researchers at the San Diego Regional Cancer Center an
important step closer to actually using the experimental treatment. The other
federal agency that regulates the use of gene therapy, the National Institutes
of Health, is still considering the request and may reach a decision as soon as
today, officials said. The FDA decision represents the first time gene therapy,
the treatment of disease with transplanted genes, has been approved on a
compassionate-use basis, officials say.

   Such pleas for the use of novel treatments are sometimes granted by the FDA
when other, conventional methods have been tried and failed. Ivor Royston, the
scientific director at the cancer center who is seeking the exemption, said he
was informed of the decision by Dr. Alex Kuta, who reviews "investigational new
drugs" at the FDA. Kuta could not be reached for comment yesterday. While
Royston welcomed the FDA decision, he said he is not prepared to say how he
would proceed if the NIH does not approve his request.

   The NIH could withhold federal grants to Royston's center if he were to use
the therapy without its sanction. Royston's request is seen as forcing the two
federal agencies to develop protocols for the expeditious handing of
compassionate pleas in gene therapy where they did not exist before. Members of
a panel that advises the NIH on gene therapy have said that there may be room
for allowing compassionate pleas, but of limited sorts, and in cases where the
treatment in question has already been reviewed in public by the committee and
approved. An ethicist not serving on the regulatory bodies, Arthur Caplan,
director of the Center for Biomedical Ethics at the University of Minnesota,
said in a recent interview that such pleas must be considered carefully.

   He believes researchers need to produce evidence that their efforts are
actually compassionate and not driven by ego or other motives. If doctors at the
San Diego center are allowed to proceed, it would be about two weeks, Royston
said, before they could deliver the genetically altered cells that they hope
will stimulate immune cells to attack the woman's brain tumor, a virulent type
that is almost always fatal. The patient, 51, already has been treated with
surgery, chemotherapy and radiation, said her husband, a San Diego businessman.

   Royston said his patient's tumor has grown by 30 percent in the past two
weeks. The husband has asked that the family not be identified to preserve their
privacy. "Our thoughts are quite positive," the husband said of the FDA ruling
yesterday. Royston acknowledged, however, that the chances his gene therapy will
help the woman are remote. "I don't have any high expectation for this," Royston
said, adding that it is nonetheless worth a try as the only way to know if it
does help. Royston's approach involves an injection of genetically altered cells
in an arm or thigh.

   Doctors plan to give the patient back her own cells that have been altered to
contain a gene for interleukin 2, a protein that the scientists believe is
crucial for attracting the immune system's cytotoxic T cells.

   They hope these T cells in the blood stream would then circulate in the brain
and attack the tumor. In November 1991, Royston sought NIH approval for a
similar gene therapy approach that he said might boost the immune system against
a number of cancers.

   The Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee, which evaluates gene therapies,
deferred his request, asking for additional animal studies to demonstrate the
technique's effectiveness. He says he plans to submit the additional data and go
through the established review process for the therapy in 1993. About two dozen
gene therapy techniques have been approved by the NIH for a range of problems
including skin cancer, brain tumors and deficiencies of the immune system.

   Patients are given cells engineered to carry a gene that provides a
therapeutic, natural product that the body needs but somehow lacks. Royston
described yesterday's FDA approval as unconditional, but he said before
treatment would proceed, he must file technical documentation.

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                             1315 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 1992 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                           December 17, 1992 Thursday
                                 FOURTH Edition

SECTION: WEST ZONER EAST ZONER MID COUNTY ZONER SOUTH ZONER; Pg. 01

LENGTH: 2123 words

HEADLINE: HARVEY PLATT: MODEST MAN WITH BIG HEART

BYLINE: ROBIN FRANZEN, Correspondent, The Oregonian <

BODY:

   Thursday, December 17, 1992 HARVEY PLATT: MODEST MAN WITH BIG HEART

   Summary:  Platt Electric Supply's owner has an obsession to help  others

   Harvey Platt tosses the miniature basketball toward the hoop. It bounces  off
the rim and falls into a net below. He tries again and again, but the ball
refuses to hit its mark.

   In an ongoing, best-of-10 contest executives at Platt Electric Supply in
Beaverton, Platt -- the company president -- has lately been the hands-down
loser. As such, he usually has to reach into his suit pocket to give up a
couple of bucks.

   ``They've been killing me,'' he said, laughing and tossing one more at the
indoor hoop.

   People who know the wisecracking electrical supplies distributor suspect he
is missing those shots intentionally. The reason? All of the money wagered  goes
to his favorite charity, the Oregon Chapter of the Cystic Fibrosis  Foundation.

   As leader of a company that is expected to do more than $160 million in
gross sales this fiscal year, Platt has more than enough to keep him busy.  But,
in the tradition of his father, who started Platt Electric in 1953, he  still
finds time to look toward the community.

   Platt adopted the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation as the company's charity of
choice more than three years ago, after learning that the son of one of his
employees had the potentially fatal genetic disease.

   Since then, Platt has joined the foundation board and personally
orchestrated public awareness and fund-raising campaigns, bringing in nearly
$200,000 in the fight for a cure.

   ``I'm obsessed,'' he admitted. ``We all think it's just a matter of time
before there is some kind of therapy.''

   Cystic fibrosis, which causes lung infection and damage, occurs in one of
every 2,000 children born in the United States, according to the foundation.

   One in 20 Americans is thought to be a symptomless carrier of the defective
gene causing the disease, which was identified in 1989. Research is under way
to develop genetic therapy that could lead to a cure.

   On Dec. 23, Platt will wrap up his fourth-annual Holiday Dream campaign by
presenting foundation officials with what promises to be a sizable check.
Checks made out to ``CF Holiday Dream'' may be sent to the corporate offices  in
Beaverton.

   The sum -- to help with research and other programs -- will reflect many
hours of letter-writing and phone work by Platt, who solicited corporate and
individual contributions throughout the country. It will also include at least
$10,000 in matching funds from Platt Electric.

   The company also holds smaller employee fund-raising events throughout the
year, sponsors the foundation's annual statewide Great Strides walkathon and
produces advertising aimed at educating the public about cystic fibrosis.

   ``Sometimes I think the Oregon chapter exists because of him -- Platt
Electric's our No. 1 contributor in Oregon and Southwest Washington,'' said
Mary E. Miller, the chapter's executive director. ``Sometimes you lose faith  in
mankind, but Harvey's one of those people that restores your faith.''

   Making all kinds of Platt-itudes about the importance of giving isn't
Platt's style. In fact, when asked why he does it, he had to pause toind  words.

   ``I guess because I think it's the right thing to do,'' he said, quickly
giving much of the credit to his wife, Sandy, 39, and the people who work for
him.

   ``Harvey will do anything for anybody as long as they don't cross him,''
Sandy Platt said. ``If he can do it, he'll do it.''

   In many ways, Platt, 42, doesn't fit the image of a corporate honcho. His
looks and mannerisms are boyish -- his shock of dark hair makes him appear
younger than his years -- and he engages in a seemingly endless game of word
play.

   During an interview, Platt behaves like an easily distracted schoolboy
playing businessman for the day. He smiles and waves to colleagues passing the
windows of his office, and his mind jumps from subject to subject.

   When he plays the corporate video, he smiles and taps his fingers to the
company theme song, noting, ``I really like the part with the music and  smiling
faces.''

   On top of that, his office looks a bit too fun, with sports memorabilia
scattered around and a toy-sized bright-green Platt delivery truck perched on  a
shelf.esk as an unusual reminder to his employees of his open-door policy --
dful and a chat with the boss.

   But the contrast doesn't bother him.

   ``People probably don't see me as a traditional business person,'' he said,
``but that's OK because I think most traditional business people are boring.
You've got to be serious sometimes, of course, but that can get a little  dry.''

   His generosity also sets him apart from others. Even competitors concede
that, beyond being a first-rate businessman who has started progressive
employee programs and sought new markets for his wire, light bulbs and
switches, Platt has an unusually soft heart.

   ``He doesn't seem to be driven like a lot of businessmen -- he's very
involved in civic affairs and projects to benefit the community,'' said Bill
Klein, owner of Taylor Electric Supply in Portland. ``And yet he doesn't go
around drawing attention to himself or pounding on his chest for the deeds  he's
done.''

   Nonetheless, ``Harvey stories'' -- accounts of Platt's kindness -- aren't
hard to come by. Here are a few:

   *Last year he helped Christopher Bies, an 11-year-old Forest Grove boy with
cerebral palsy, get a new trained helper dog after the boy's Labrador  retriever
died of cancer.

   Platt donated $1,000 to a fund-raising campaign for Bies by being the high
bidder on a Portland Trail Blazer basketball, and offered to fly the boy to
Santa Rosa, Calif., in the company's King Air  to pick up the new dog from a
training facility. Then, in true Platt style, he gave the ball to the boy to
keep.

   *Last fall, Platt dashed off a $2,500 check to a fund-raising campaign for
needy kids headed by a local radio personality. And Sandy Platt recently sent  a
check by cab to a food bank that was desperately in need after being  robbed.

   *Platt led the effort in 1991-92 to install new field lighting at Sunset
High School, when the school could not afford such an expense on its own.

   *In 1987-88, the company's largest beneficiary was the Parry Center for
Children, which provides treatment for emotionally disturbed youngsters. Said
Platt: ``A bunch of us executives went shopping for gifts at Toys R Us, and
looking for hair curlers and blocks was really fun.''

   Another recent Platt gesture was to slip a pair of Blazer tickets into the
hands of Jason Danielson, a 7-year-old Portland boy with cystic fibrosis.

   *Platt's ``tradition of caring,'' which he made the company slogan, has  also
caught on with his 700 employees, who work in six Western states.

   For instance, they sold Blazer souvenirs and competed in an employee sports
challenge to raise money for the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation. They have helped
the Salvation Army in providing Thanksgiving meals and Christmas gifts for the
needy; volunteered locally at the Shriners Hospital for Crippled Children; and
served as mentors for local schoolchildren.

   The good deeds have been rewarded, in more ways than one.

   For the last three years, the National Association of Electrical
Distributors has given its highest community service award to Platt Electric.

   Gov. Barbara Roberts recognized the company in April for its efforts, and
Platt, a Trail Blazer sponsor and avid fan, was named one of the
Budweiser-Blazer All-Stars for his work.

   The other payoff, though not directly related, has been financial. Since
1986, when Platt took over as president, sales at the more than 60 branches
have nearly doubled, with November's sales hitting a new high.

   - A family company

   Platt was born in Portland in 1950, and even when he was 5 years old, he
knew he would be part of the business started by his father, Morris, and  uncle,
Isadore, in the city's Northwest district.

   ``I remember stamping `Platt Electric' on brochures when I was just a  little
kid,'' he said, ``and there was never any doubt that that's what I was  going to
do.''

   Even his brief ambition to be a sportscaster after studying political
science at the University of California at Los Angeles didn't mess with
destiny. He felt he was too old to get into such a career at that point and
decided he needed to eat. So he started full time with his father in 1972.

   ``I had gotten relatively good grades, and thought I was well educated, and
my father put me to work wrapping UPS packages,'' Platt remembered with a
smile.

   If wasn't long, however, before he became an outside salesman and got his
feet wet in purchasing and administration. Then, in late 1985, his older
brother, Jerry, who was the company's president, was diagnosed with a rare  form
of lung cancer. Within six weeks he was dead.

   There was never any question who would be his successor.

   ``I had to pretty much skip all of middle management, so I wasn't sure I
could do it,'' Platt said. ``But I was much too immature to worry about it, so I
jut kept doing what I had been doing.''

   That year, the company moved to its 180,000-square-foot office and
distribution center at 10605 S.W. Allen Blvd.

   ce, Platt has sorted out his likes and dislikes, strengths and weaknesses.

   His favorite part of the job, he said, is doling out ``atta-boys'' to
deserving employees. What he dreads: Getting up in front of audiences.

   ``I'm shy -- the jokes are a defense mechanism, I know that,'' he said.
``But I don't fight it. You can't be something you're not.''

   What Platt may lack in administration he makes up in people skills and an
ability to delegate -- traits he says he got from the man who most influenced
him, his father.

   As he sees it, his forte is surrounding himself with good employees, then
them in a way that gives them freedom to do their jobs well. He pointed to an
intensive, three-day training program for managers at a mock store in the
company headquarters dubbed ``Platt University,'' and cited employee incentive
programs.

   ``I may not be good at long-term planning and sales, but whenever I hear an
employee needs help, I try to get involved,'' he said.

   He also tries to make the work environment upbeat. ``I figure, we aren't
just here to sell stuff -- you've got to have fun,'' he said. ``If we are here
only to sell, our priorities are screwed up.''

   - A family man

   When he leaves his extended work family for the day, Platt drives his black
BMW to his home in a former Street of Dreams neighborhood in Cedar Mill.

   He and Sandy, a preschool teacher at Neveh Shalom Foundation Preschool, met
at UCLA and have been married 20 years. They have two daughters: Melissa, 13,
an eighth-grader at Cedar Park Intermediate School, and Jennifer, 16, a junior
at Sunset High School. Santana, an aging golden retriever, and Lucy, a
multicolored cat, round out the family.

   Sandy Platt, who seems every bit as down-to-earth as her husband, credited
Platt with being a family man above all else -- one who changed their
children's diapers without being asked.

   Harvey Platt has a quick excuse for being an involved father before it was
fashionable: ``What can I say? It's because I have Jewish guilt.''

   Platt has remained active in the lives of his daughters, dancers who
occasionally rely on dad for rides to practice. He even provides a small dance
studio in the basement for their workouts, although he is eyeing the space for a
larger home office someday.

   A look inside his own handsome study upstairs suggests the reason for his
expansionism: The study soverrun with sports memorabilia, including an  envelope
postmarked at the 1939 opening of the Baseball Hall of Fame in  N.Y., and graced
with Babe Ruth's signature.

   Platt's idea of relaxation is browsing through a catalog in the study or
hitting a Blazer game or a movie. He doesn't golf and hates Palm Springs -- a
place he said is reserved for ``newlyweds and nearly deads'' -- but he figures
he should probably travel more with the family.

   One highlight of last summer was a vacation to New York City, where  Jennifer
looked at several dance academies, including The Juilliard School.

   Platt remembered the trip while looking at a theater playbill on his
daughter's bedroom wall, signed with messy flourish by Donald Trump. Laughing,
he asked: ``Is that an egomaniac's signature or what?''

   Platt, on the other hand, appears anything but self-absorbed. And his work
in the community has made him appreciate his own good fortune even more.

   ``I know it's going to sound trite, but I feel it's my responsibility to  pay
something back to the community I do business in,'' he said. ``Being  around CF
and seeing these sick kids helps you see that.''

   ILLUSTRATION: 3 Color photos by ROBERT BACH - of The Oregonian staff.

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 2006


                             1316 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1992 The Journal of Commerce, Inc.
                              Journal of Commerce

                           December 15, 1992, Tuesday

SECTION: CHEM, Pg. 7A

LENGTH: 845 words

HEADLINE: CHEMICAL BRIEFS

BYLINE: Wire and Staff Reports

DATELINE:  TOKYO

BODY:


   MITSUI FIRMS TO BUILD

   CHINA CHEMICAL PLANT

   Japan's Mitsui and Co. and Mitsui Engineering and Shipbuilding Co. have
received an order to build a petrochemical plant in China, a Mitsui and Co.
spokesman said.

   The state-run Chinese petrochemical company Sinopec International placed the
5 billion-yen order for a polypropylene plant with an annual output of 40,000
tons, he said.

   The plant, to be located near the Daqing crude-oil field in northeastern
China, is expected to be operating by the beginning of 1996.

   The project will be financed in part by yen loans provided by the Export-
Import Bank of Japan.

HEMOPHILIA DRUG GAINS

   GOVERNMENT APPROVAL

   BOSTON - Genetics Institute Inc., which lost a long and bitter legal battle
over a lucrative anti-anemia drug 21 months ago, last week celebrated with
champagne the formal government approval of its genetically engineered drug to
treat hemophilia.

   The drug, Factor VIII, is the blood-clotting protein that is missing or
deficient in the 15,000 to 17,000 hemophiliacs in the United States with an
equal number in Europe and slightly fewer in Asia.

   "It has taken us 11 1/2 years and $ 200 million to reach this day," said
Gabriel Schmergel, Genetics Institute president.

   He estimated that Factor VIII revenues will account for about one-third of
Genetics Institute's estimated revenues of $ 100 million next year. The company
is expected to report revenues of $ 85 million this year.

SOMATOGEN TO CONTINUE

   BLOOD SUBSTITUTE TRIALS

   BOULDER, Colo._ Somatogen Inc. said the second part of Phase I trials for its
blood substitute product will continue into next year, rather than ending this
year, as expected.

   The Boulder-based biopharmaceutical company gave no reason for the extension.

   The company also announced it expects to introduce a simplified commercial
manufacturing process that will increase yields and quality of the product.

   Somatogen is developing a genetically engineered blood substitute called
rHb1.

ABB LUMMUS TO HELP

   IN FORMOSA CONSTRUCTION

   BLOOMFIELD, N.J. - ABB Lummus Crest has won a basic engineering contract from
Formosa Plastics Corp. to lay the groundwork for a $ 1 billion refinery in
Taiwan.

   The refinery, with a capacity of 300,000 barrels a day, will make
petrochemical feedstocks for Formosa, ABB Lummus said. It would not disclose the
value of the contract.

QUANTUM CHEMICAL

   TO CLOSE ILL. PLANT

   CINCINNATI - Quantum Chemical Corp. here will shut down its 220-million-a-
year ethylene oxide, ethylene glycol plant located in Morris, Ill., by the end
of next month.

   The company cites projections of a long-term glut of this material.

   Ethylene oxide is used in the production of detergent and cosmetics. Ethylene
glycol is used to make polyester, resins and automotive antifreeze.

BOSTON COMPANY BUYS

   SUN PHARMACEUTICALS

   FORT LAUDERDALE, Fla. - A Pompano Beach company that makes the third-largest
selling brand of sunscreen and skin care products in the United States was sold
last week for an undisclosed price.

   Sun Pharmaceuticals, which makes Banana Boat sunscreen and suntan oil, had
been one-third owned by Bob Bell, it founder, and two-thirds owned by limited
partnerships.

   The new owner, Thomas H. Lee Co., is a Boston-based investment company that
controls several national consumer brands, including Snapple beverages, Playtex
family goods and Ghirardelli chocolate.

GENZYME TO BEGIN TESTS

   OF FIBROSIS THERAPY

   BOSTON - Genzyme Corp. and two academic research institutions have received
approval from a federal advisory panel to begin clinical trials of their
experimental gene therapy for cystic fibrosis.

   The disease, which affects 30,000 Americans and occurs in one of every 2,000
to 3,000 child births, is caused by a mutation in the gene encoding a cell
membrane protein. The result is difficult breathing and frequent infections as
airway passages are clogged by a thick mucus. Repeated infections in the lungs
often leads to death.

   Three research groups, each working independently, have developed drug
therapies that contain normal genes that are expected to overcome the flawed
gene responsible for cystic fibrosis. Each group is using a cold virus to
deliver the normal genes into cystic fibrosis patients.

   Their drug systems will not cause infection but still invade targeted cells
to produce a key missing protein, according to research theory.

RULE WOULD MANDATE

   RECYCLING SOME CFCS

WASHINGTON - The Environmental Protection Agency has proposed a rule mandating
the recycling of ozone-depleting chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) from home and office
air conditioners and refrigerators.

   The proposal would establish standards and requirements for recycling CFCs
released while servicing and disposing of the equipment, while setting standards
for the quality of the recycled refrigerant.

   The agency said the proposal and an initial venting ban would lower emissions
of ozone-depleting refrigerants to 51,000 metric tons per year from about
111,000 tons.

EDITOR-NOTE:
CHEMICAL BRIEFS

LOAD-DATE: December 17, 1996


                             1317 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1992 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                    December 14, 1992, Monday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; PAGE F10

LENGTH: 732 words

HEADLINE: Eskimo Pie Teams Up With Ghiradelli, A San Francisco Chocolate Treat

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: From News Services and Staff Reports

BODY:

   Eskimo Pie Corp. of Richmond will introduce a new line of designer ice cream
bars carrying the name of Ghiradelli, the famous San Francisco chocolate
company.

   This is the first time Ghiradelli's trademark has been licensed.

   The new ice cream bars, slated for national distribution, will be phased in
regionally next year. The line will be made up of high-quality ice cream bars
covered with Ghirardelli coatings: dark chocolate, milk chocolate or milk
chocolate with almonds.

   Eskimo Pie has "a proven marketing and sales system, as well as the
manufacturing and distribution network needed to successfully establish the
Ghirardelli ice cream bar in the frozen novelty market," said John J. Anton,
president of the chocolate company.

   GRC International Inc. of Vienna received a contract from Ford Motor Co. to
convert and enhance Ford's materials and toxicology system.

   Terms were not disclosed.

   The company said the project will help Ford system users meet increasing
environmental regulatory requirements in a cost-effective manner.

   The project will be completed over 18 months. The work associated with the
contract will be performed in Vienna, Dearborn, Mich., and Great Britain.

   Paramax Systems Corp. of McLean announced a contract worth $ 3 million from
the Royal Thai Navy as the first of several awards for the navy's command,
control, communications and intelligence program.

   Group 1 Software Inc. of Greenbelt, a provider of mail management and postal
discount software, and Medallion Systems Inc. of Vienna, specialists in
membership management and accounting systems, have signed an agreement to
jointly market Group 1's midrange software products with Medallion products to
nonprofit associations and membership organizations.

   Interstate General Co. L.P., a real estate company in St. Charles, Md.,
received zoning approval on Puerto Rico's largest mixed-use planned development,
Parque Escorial.

   Interstate General holds an 80 percent interest in the project in partnership
with an affiliate of Rexach Construction, Puerto Rico's largest contractor. The
plan calls for 2,900 housing units and more than 1.1 million square feet of
commercial and industrial space.

   /training/etc, a software training firm, was formed in Columbia, Md.

   Kershner & Co. of Alexandria was retained by Trinity College of Washington to
develop print and broadcast advertising.

   Genetic Therapy Inc. of Gaithersburg said it has begun treatment of the first
patient in the company's trial using gene therapy to treat brain cancer. The
company said it is collaborating with a team of clinicians, including members of
the National Institute of Health.

   Summa Medical Corp. of Vienna said the voluntary debt restructuring plan it
submitted to its creditors and subsidiaries in October has been approved and
will be implemented immediately. The plan includes an offer to fully compensate
creditors with claims of more than $ 15,000 with preferred shares or cash flow
notes and an offer to pay creditors with claims of less than $ 15,000 from 20
percent to 33 percent of the amounts due them.

   Maureen Rogers Communications of Arlington was appointed by the Preservation
Conferences Department of the National Trust for Historic Preservation to write
and edit marketing and advertising materials for the organization's annual trade
show.

   Danaher Corp. of Washington announced the completion of a $ 100 million
private placement debt financing. The seven-year financing, which will fund Dec.
15, has an average life of five and a half years at an average interest cost of
7.25 percent.

   Montgomery National Bank and Prince George's National Bank announced that
they have received final merger approval to form Allegiance Bank, N.A. The
combined bank will have assets of $ 96 million. The combined bank continues to
be owned by the holding company of Allegiance Banc Corp. of Bethesda.

   CleanNet USA, a janitorial company based in Columbia, Md., said it would open
offices in Detroit, Chicago, Houston and San Francisco.

   Edward Segal Communications of Washington was retained to provide media
relations services to Leadership Employment for Armed Services Personnel in
Washington.?

   Announcements of news and developments affecting Washington area companies
should be sent to Regional Report, Business News Department, The Washington
Post, 1150 15th St. NW, Washington, D.C., 20071-5302.


                             1318 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1992 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            December 13, 1992 Sunday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A-1

LENGTH: 1436 words

HEADLINE: Therapy OK asked for dying patient;
Technique unproven, but may help woman

BYLINE: DAVID GRAHAM, Staff Writer

BODY:

   In a case that could set a precedent in gene therapy, La Jolla scientists are
seeking special permission to use an unproven technique to treat a San Diego
woman who they say otherwise will likely die from a brain tumor. Dr. Ivor
Royston, scientific director of the San Diego Regional Cancer Center, has asked
federal health officials to allow the compassionate use of a genetic technique
that officials turned down for human testing a year ago pending the completion
of more tests on animals. Essentially, the researchers want one-time approval to
try a speculative treatment that may provide some benefit to a patient for whom
conventional methods have not worked. The request is forcing the two federal
agencies that regulate the emerging field of gene therapy to develop guidelines
for how to respond to compassionate pleas. "As more and more people are using
gene therapy, there will be more pressure to try treatments that might help
dying people," Royston said. "People will want them.

   There needs to be a procedure for dealing with these cases." The National
Institutes of Health (NIH) has sent Royston's inquiry to two separate
committees, and a recommendation may go the NIH director, Dr. Bernadine Healy,
for action within days or weeks, a spokesman said. The U.S. Food and Drug
Administration (FDA), which must approve new drugs and therapies, is reviewing
the request, too, a spokesman said. Royston's inquiry represents the first time
either agency has been asked to consider approval of gene therapy based on
compassion, spokesmen said. "I made an impassioned appeal, and if we get the
go-ahead, then we would start treating this woman," Royston said. Thus far,
about two dozen approaches to using transplanted genes to treat patients have
been approved by the NIH and FDA. The therapies, for skin cancer, immune system
deficiencies and brain cancer, among other problems, involve introducing cells
engineered to carry a gene that provides a therapeutic, natural product needed
by the body but somehow lacking. Royston's approach involves an injection in the
arm or thigh of genetically altered cells that would produce a protein the
scientists believe could stimulate an immune system response to attack the
woman's tumor. Central to the decision on Royston's appeal, however, are
questions of whether the treatment has any reasonable chance of benefitting the
patient, whether it will do more harm than good, and whether doctors can
establish in a single patient what effect the treatment does have, NIH officials
said. Royston said the woman patient, a former Iowan now living in San Diego,
came to his attention through her primary physician, who is a member of the
private San Diego Regional Cancer Center's board of directors.

   The doctor asked Royston whether gene therapy might benefit the women, whom
Royston declined to identify further.

   She is about 50 years old. The woman's husband said he regards Royston's
experimental gene therapy as her last option. "This tumor is 100 percent fatal.

   It's clear she's going to die," said the husband, who in a telephone
interview would identify himself only as a San Diego businessman.

   He said he wants to protect the family's privacy. "When you get to the point
where you've tried everything known to man, you've got to take the next step.

   There's just not anything else out there," he said. The patient's cancer, a
glioma, is the most virulent type of brain tumor, Royston said.

   The tumor's volume has increased by 30 percent in the past two weeks. Members
of the NIH's Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee (RAC), which reviews gene
therapy applications, recently have indicated there is room for compassionate
pleas, but under limited circumstances. Regulators might contemplate relaxing
patient eligibility requirements for approved treatments, but they might not
sanction use of techniques not previously sanctioned, wrote LeRoy Walters, a
Georgetown University ethicist and committee member in evaluating the inquiry.
"I do not think that the RAC should become involved in advocating the entry of
patients into protocols that it has not reviewed at a public meeting and
recommended to the NIH director for approval," Walters said in a letter to the
committee. Another scientist on the committee, Robert Haselkorn of the
University of Chicago, would prefer that Royston first present scientific
evidence to the board for evaluation. Dr. Robert Sobol, a colleague of
Royston's, said the La Jolla scientists believe, based on animal tests, that
their therapeutic effort to boost the immune system might work against a range
of tumors, including the woman's. If given permission, Royston and Sobol want to
give the patient cells altered to contain a gene for interlukin 2, a protein
that the scientists think is crucial for attracting the immune system's
cytotoxic T cells that can destroy tumors. They hope these T cells in the blood
stream would then circulate in the brain and attack the tumor. The La Jolla
scientists also are encouraged by a new, as yet unpublished study by other
researchers, in which scientists boosted production of disease-fighting T cells,
which in turn attacked tumors in the brains of rats, Royston said. Royston is
emphatic that his plea is not an effort to avoid complying with federal rules.

   He said he still intends to resubmit his original proposal with the data from
the additional animal studies the committee requested when it turned down his
bid in November 1991. He expects to do that sometime in 1993. But the San Diego
woman could die before the customary regulatory process is complete, he said.
The issue was referred to the advisory committee after Royston wrote to an NIH
official asking how a compassionate plea would be handled.

   A subcommittee chaired by Walters is expected to make a recommendation on
procedures at a meeting March 1 and 2. Royston said he also has since written
directly to Healy at the NIH, asking her to intervene. That request, received
Wednesday, already has been forwarded to a separate NIH special review
committee, said NIH spokesman Tom Flavin.

   It will receive a "rapid review." Because such a request has not arisen
before, it is not clear whether Healy alone could grant permission or whether
regulations require that the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee first consider
it, Flavin said.

   In that case, Royston said he hopes Healy would convene a special meeting of
the committee. There is a brain tumor gene therapy testing program that has been
approved by the NIH and FDA; it is being directed by Edward Oldfield, an NIH
physician. The San Diego woman was turned down for the Oldfield experiment, her
husband said.

   Because she had had two major surgeries, chemotherapy and radiation
treatment, Oldfield thought it would be difficult to determine whether she was
benefitting from the gene therapy or something else, the husband said.

   Moreover, at the time, more than 100 people had applied for about two dozen
spots in the trials, he said.

   Royston estimates the number has grown to 650. The husband said he has
contacted 31 cancer research centers in the United States, Japan, England,
France and Italy since his wife's tumor was found last January. "We've tried not
to leave any stone unturned," he said.

   "I've spent hundreds of hours on the phone with researchers about different
types of treatments." At the suggestion of a friend, the husband said he also
sought help from U.S. Sen. Tom Harkin of Iowa. Harkin then wrote to the NIH
director to ask if there were some way the woman could be considered for
treatment on a compassionate basis, the senator's office has confirmed. Harkin
wrote at the family's behest, Royston said, adding that he was not involved in
suggesting or encouraging it. One committee member, Robert Haselkorn of the
University of Chicago, has questioned Harkin's effort, saying in a letter: "The
manipulation of a U.S. senator coupled with the threat of further congressional
action is also unconscionable."

   A copy of Harkin's letter was not available. An ethicist not serving on the
regulatory bodies, Arthur Caplan, director of the Center for Biomedical Ethics
at the University of Minnesota, said he believes there is room for compassionate
use exemptions. "If it is a request for compassion, researchers need to produce
evidence why what they want to do is compassionate and why it isn't cruel or
driven by ego or something else," Caplan said. Regulators should be careful to
ensure that a terminally ill patient's desperation is not played upon, possibly
causing emotional, physical or economic harm from a technique that has little
chance of working, he said.

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                             1319 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1992 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                   December 9, 1992, Wednesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 621 words

HEADLINE: STERN REBUKE

BODY:

    Sen. Alfonse D'Amato, R-New York, came to shock jock Howard Stern's defense
Tuesday, calling recent Federal Communications Commission actions a violation of
free speech. The FCC levied a $ 105,000 fine against a Los Angeles radio
station, claiming Stern's show was indecent; it's also considering $ 900,000
fines against Stern's employer, Infinity Broadcasting. In a terse letter to FCC
Chairman Alfred C. Sikes, D'Amato said, ''What concerns me most is the strong
impression that these actions are being considered because of political pressure
from narrow interest groups ... I therefore urge the Commission to reject these
narrow-minded calls for punitive actions against Mr. Stern ...  and to preserve
our Constitutionally guaranteed freedoms.''

 COMIC RELIEF: Doonesbury's Joanie Caucus and Lacey Davenport are among the best
role models for women, according to an article in January's Working Mother, out
this week. Other worthy ones: Blondie, who ''got her catering business off the
ground in record time, and actually fired Dagwood for eating up all her
profits,'' and Sally Forth, who ''knows how to laugh while she juggles an office
job and the demands of a husband and daughter.'' On the flip side, some bad
apples:
Cathy's Andrea, an ''obnox
ious, obsessive Yuppie who overanalyzes every move her overscheduled daughter,
Zenith, makes,'' and The Family Circus' Mommy, who ...''doesn't even have a
first name.''

HOLIDAY SPIRIT: Looks like we can't get enough of those yuletide ditties. For
the first time ever, Billboard next week will have four Christmas albums in the
top 10, according to Soundscan, which tabulates sales figures for the magazine.
(No word yet on exact rankings because sales figures are still being compiled).
But Amy Grant's Home for Christmas leads the pack; followed by A Very Special
Christmas 2, which includes songs by Randy Travis, Bonnie Raitt and Luther
Vandross; Neil Diamond's Christmas Album; and Garth Brooks' Beyond the Season.

 BRAIN CANCER HOPE: A brain cancer patient this week became the first to get an
experimental gene therapy at the National Institutes of Health. Researchers are
starting the trial just six months after reporting promising results in rat
studies. The human study, meant to show whether the treatment is safe and
potentially effective, will enroll up to 20 brain cancer patients who have
failed all other treatments. Doctors will put genes from a herpes virus inside
the tumors, then try to destroy them with an anti-herpes drug.

 SHAWN DIES: William Shawn, editor of The New Yorker from 1952 to 1987 , died
Tuesday of a heart attack, according to a member of the magazine's editorial
staff. He was 85. His career at The New Yorker began as a reporter in 1933. As
editor, he published and developed some of the U.S.'s most important writers.
Tina Brown, now editor of the magazine, said: ''William Shawn, though he would
never have admitted it, was probably the greatest magazine editor who ever lived
and one of the most important figures in American letters this century. ... To
the degree that writing and reporting in this country are today more incisive,
more thoughtful, and more accurate than they were a generation ago, it is in no
small part because of him.''

 FDA GUIDELINES: The Food and Drug Administration announced rules Tuesday to
speed approval of new drugs for incurable or life-threatening illnesses like
cancer, AIDS and Alzheimer's disease. The new rules will grant approval to drugs
that scientists believe show ''meaningful benefit over currently available
therapies,'' the FDA said in a statement. The drugs will not have to go through
years of clinical trials to prove their effectiveness.

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC, color, G.B. Trudeau (Cartoon)

CUTLINE: CAUCUS: A comic woman to look up to.


                             1320 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1992 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                   December 9, 1992, Wednesday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; PAGE F2; DIGEST

LENGTH: 731 words

SERIES: Occasional

BODY:

   Chrysler signed an agreement with two car dealers in Moscow to sell and
service Jeeps, minivans and commercial vans in Russia.

   Novell and Apple are in early stages of high-level talks that could involve
technology sharing or a merger, industry sources told Reuter.

   Genetic Therapy of Gaithersburg and the National Institutes of Health
initiated a trial using gene therapy to treat brain cancer.

   Flxible, the Ohio-based bus maker, plans to lay off nearly 900 employees this
week because of decreasing demand. About two-thirds of the workers will be
called back on Jan. 11 when production resumes, said a spokesman.

   Allied Research of Baltimore and a division of Steyr-Daimler-Puch of Austria
reached a production and marketing agreement that involves establishing an
ammunition plant for an Asian country.

   AT&T and a group of regional telephone companies agreed to compensate
hundreds of employees who were denied benefits following the breakup of the Bell
System, lawyers for the employees said.

   Citibank began selling its first securities backed by pooled debt from its
Choice portfolio of Visa and MasterCard credit cards. The $ 2.18 billion global
offering consists mostly of floating-rate securities and is the bank company's
largest-ever packaging of credit card debt into securities.

   McDonald's began testing a meatless burger in five outlets in the
Netherlands. McDonald's said there are no plans to introduce the product, which
has taken two years to develop, in the United States. The new burger consists of
a mix of potatoes, peas, carrots, corn, onions and spices, a McDonald's
spokeswoman said.

   Alliant Techsystems has dropped it attempt to buy a large part of Olin's
defense business following an effort by federal regulators to block the
transaction on antitrust grounds. The companies are the only two makers of
certain types of ammunition used by the Pentagon.

   Schwinn Bicycle received a $ 40 million offer from two companies for
Schwinn's trademarks, customer lists, contracts, inventory and records. Schwinn
has until Thursday to tell a bankruptcy judge whether it is willing to accept
the offer from the Zell-Chilmark Fund, a Chicago investment firm, and Scott
U-S-A of Sun Valley, Idaho.

   Intel, the nation's largest computer chip maker, plans this week to urge the
Bush administration to abandon efforts to conclude GATT's Uruguay Round of trade
talks during the administration's last days. Intel argues more time is needed to
protect patents, preserve the U.S. anti-dumping law and eliminate European
semiconductor tariffs.

   The Pension Benefit Guaranty Corp., the federal agency that insures private
pensions, said it will raise the maximum annual level of coverage for individual
employees by $ 1,023, to $ 29,250, next year. The federal pension insurance fund
is made up of employer payments, but if it ran short, taxpayers would have to
make up the difference.

   The FDIC proposed new rules governing when regulators can give financial
assistance or other aid to an ailing bank or thrift that is in danger of
collapsing. Under the proposal, regulators must be convinced that the
institution has a good chance of recovering and that providing help would be
less costly than waiting until it fails.

   Gillette bought 80 percent of Wizamet, a leading Polish razor-blade
manufacturer, for an undisclosed amount of cash. The other 20 percent stake will
be held by Wizamet's employees.

   NL Industries, which sued Lockheed after an unsuccessful 1990 effort to take
over the aerospace company, said it won a $ 30 million jury verdict against
Lockheed. NL's suit accused Lockheed of violating federal securities laws by
making false and misleading public statements about Lockheed's employee stock
ownership plan.

   Sikorsky Aircraft, a subsidiary of United Technologies, signed a $ 1.1
billion agreement with Turkey for the purchase and joint production of 95 Black
Hawk S-70-A/28 helicopters.

   H.J. Heinz reported a 26 percent leap in second-quarter profit.

   Deere said it earned $ 4.2 million in its fourth fiscal quarter, compared
with a loss of $ 81.5 million in the same 1991 period.

   Who should grade CEOs? Directors believe they should evaluate the performance
of a company's chief executive -- but only if they don't also hold jobs at the
company, a Business Roundtable survey of directors of Fortune 1000 companies
concludes.


                             1321 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 1992 Boston Herald Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                               The Boston Herald

                            December 8, 1992 Tuesday

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. 39

LENGTH: 591 words

HEADLINE: EDITORIAL;
A miracle that came too late

BYLINE: BEVERLY BECKHAM

BODY:

   It was just a blurb in the paper, three paragraphs out of thousands,
relegated to the bottom of a page. And why not? Troops are pouring into Somalia.
The IRA is gift-wrapping bombs for Christmas. The fighting continues in Bosnia.
Santa Claus is coming to town, as well as Arsenio to champion the fight against
AIDS. We are duly occupied. Besides, how much space did this news need?

   A National Institute of Health advisory committee approved for the first time
human gene therapy experiments to treat cystic fibrosis, the most common lethal
hereditary disease in the United States. Researchers plan to replace the
defective cystic fibrosis gene, which causes premature death, with a healthy
normal gene.

   Pretty basic. Pretty miraculous, too.

   My friend Anne's daughter died of cystic fibrosis eight-and-a-half years ago.
Amy was 11, in the sixth grade, and my daughter Lauren's best friend.

   We knew Amy was going to die, everyone knew, but we knew it intellectually
the way we know that someday we'll grow old, and someday babies not even born
yet will have gray hair.

   We didn't believe it, couldn't imagine it. Someday was theory. Amy's death
was an eternity away.

   And then it came, and it didn't seem real even then. Amy was a firefly, a
Tinkerbell, always singing, dancing, laughing, playing the piano, playing dress
up, playing life to its fullest. How could someone so alive, suddenly not be?

   When someone dies, we tend to make that person far better in death than they
ever were in life. We exaggerate their goodness and forget their flaws. We
create a person who never was.

   But Amy was too young to have any real flaws. She was stubborn. She argued
with her mother. But was that a flaw? No, it was just part of her strength and
part of her charm. She argued not like a little kid, not with whines and pouts
and tears, but with intelligence and reason. She was her mother's equal.

   She used to win arguments, too, because she was relentless and passionate.
You had to laugh, listening to the pair. They were cut from the same cloth.

   Amy squeezed so much life into her few years. She took joy in every moment.
She excelled at everything she did. She read voluminously, drew, wrote, acted,
sang, played the piano and the recorder. When you walked away from her you
always thought, she is so smart. She is so incredibly talented. In so many ways
she was very adult.

   But she was a child, too - still into make believe, still into "the handsome
prince met the beautiful princess and they lived happily every after." And still
into wishing on stars and chasing after rainbows.

   We've tried to keep her alive, to hold on not just to her memory, but to her.
We talk about her, laugh over the things she said. We try to imagine what she
would be like today.

   But this gets more difficult every year. She would be 20 now, yet in our
minds she remains 11. We could envision her 12 and 13. But 20? A woman, in
college.

   She always said she wanted to go to Radcliffe. I try to visualize her there.
But the picture I see is of a child, tall like a grown-up, dressed like a grown
up, but with a child's determined face.

   You wait for a cure, and you pray for a cure. And when you read that gene
therapy could save thousands of Amys, you are grateful, and you bow your head
and give thanks.

   But you curse, too, because the timing is all wrong. Because eight years is
nothing in the life of the world, not even a flinch in eternity. And when you
read that patients today will be able to inhale a good gene to replace the bad
gene, you weep because the miracle came too late for Amy.

LOAD-DATE: March 16, 2007


                             1322 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 1992 Boston Herald Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                               The Boston Herald

                            December 8, 1992 Tuesday

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 48

LENGTH: 628 words

HEADLINE: ON STATE STREET;
Changing investor attitudes spelling relief for biotech

BYLINE: DAVID CALLAWAY and ROBERT POWELL

BODY:

   Hold on for dear life. Biotech stocks are coming back.

   A steady stream of positive analysts' reports combined with the year-long
upswing in smaller, over-the-counter stocks have helped boost biotech stocks
back into the limelight.

   As a sector, biotech stocks grew by about 1 percent in the third quarter, as
measured by the CooperScott Biotech Index. Now that's not a great jump,
especially when compared to a 3 percent rise in the S&P 500 stock index for the
same time period.

   But many more mature biotech companies are breaking away from the pack as
investors become more particular about which biotech stocks they choose and are
not just buying the whole industry.

   For major Massachusetts biotech firms, such as Biogen Inc. and Genzyme Corp.,
both of Cambridge, the shift in investor attitudes has been a blessing.

   Stock in Biogen closed at $43.50 a share, down 62.5 cents on the
over-the-counter market yesterday, just a few points off its 52-week high of
$47. The stock had dipped as low as $18.50 during the last 12 months.

   For Genzyme the news was even better yesterday. Word that the company had
obtained approval to begin trials of its gene therapy for cystic fibrosis bumped
the stock up another $1.625 per share yesterday to $45.625 on the
over-the-counter market. And the negative impact of an earlier report that
smaller doses of its Ceradase product were effective against rare Gaucher's
disease seemed to be dissipating.

   The stock is still closer to its 52-week low of $32.50 than its high of
$66.50. But the analysts are climbing back on board one by one. So if you
haven't sold your biotech portfolio already, you might want to hold it a little
while longer.

   Does anybody in the financial industry really believe Jim Robinson is
voluntarily vacating his post as chairman of American Express Co. at a crucial
time in the company's history?

   The diversified financial services giant is in the process of eliminating
some 6,000 jobs and reevaluating how to prop up its faltering charge card and
brokerage businesses.

   It's even hired comedian Jerry Seinfeld to do a full-scale round of
commercials attempting to bring customers back into the friendly fold of the
green card.

   Either Robinson has come to realize that it could take years to fix the
company and he doesn't have the time, or the company's board already has a
better plan.

   Either way, Wall Street responded with much satisfaction, sending American
Express stock up $1.50 per share yesterday to $24.825 on the New York Stock
Exchange. The stock was the most actively traded issue on the exchange with some
8 million shares changing hands.

   First John Gutfreund of Salomon Brothers and now Jim Robinson. Looks like the
barbarians are finally giving up the gate.

   New York City sent an early Christmas present to the folks over at State
Street Boston Corp. last week.

   The New York City Retirement Systems fund announced it decided to extend for
another four years its contract with the bank to maintain custody of some $5
billion in short-term assets.

   Sources said the fund, one of the larger and more aggressive retirement funds
in the country, apparently awarded State Street the business after a tense
bidding contest that included other major players in the $2 trillion custody
business.

   Other bidders were Boston Safe Deposit and Trust Co., Mellon Bank (which is
in the process of purchasing Boston Safe for $1.5 billion), Northern Trust Co.
and Bank of America.

   The contract did not include the fund's long-term assets, which are about $40
million and are run by Citibank. But State Street Senior Vice President James
Darr said the victory was "an important win for us."

   Another contract to maintain custody of the fund's global assets will be put
out for bid next spring, sources said.

   'Tis the season to be jolly.

LOAD-DATE: March 16, 2007


                             1323 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                December 8, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section D; Page 2; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 807 words

HEADLINE: Business and Health;
AIDS Solution: Long Way to Go

BYLINE: By Milt Freudenheim

BODY:

   GOVERNMENT agencies approved plans last week to expand testing of several
unproven AIDS vaccines, but Government and company researchers are still far
from a pharmaceutical solution to the AIDS problem.

   Scientists say that combining AZT with other drugs that attack the virus
offer more immediate promise than the vaccines.

    Advocates for people with AIDS are not sanguine about either vaccines or the
anti-viral drugs, which mainly buy time for patients by slowing progression of
the disease. The advocates are urging President-elect Bill Clinton's transition
team to order an evaluation, which they hope will lead to a shake-up of the
Government's $1.08 billion-a-year AIDS research effort.

   Besides AZT, a Burroughs-Wellcome drug, two chemically similar drugs,
Bristol-Myers Squibb's DDI and Hoffmann-La Roche's recently approved DDC, can be
used with AZT or as a successor treatment. Bristol-Myers Squibb recently
received premarketing approval for d4T, a fourth member of the same family,
which it will make widely available during testing.

   Mathilde Krim, a scientist who heads the American Foundation for AIDS
Research in New York, said patients who took the anti-viral drugs in
combinations could reduce the doses. The drugs' toxic effects differ and the
combinations may be effective longer than AZT by itself.

   "The bad news is that none of these drugs are very effective for long periods
of time," said Dr. Anthony S. Fauci, head of the National Institute of Allergy
and Infectious Diseases. "What we need are drugs or combinations of drugs which,
when given early, can prolong the disease-free state for 10 to 20 years instead
of three years."

   A new generation of anti-viral drugs is moving into early testing for safety
and efficacy. They include Roche's TAT, an enzyme inhibitor, and protease
inhibitors, another group that Dr. Fauci said may start tests "reasonably soon."

   Half a dozen companies are also working on genetic engineering that involves
so-called antisense or mirror images of molecules to block the H.I.V. virus.
None are ready for human testing against AIDS. But Isis, a biotechnology company
in Carlsbad, Calif., is testing an anti-sense drug for papilloma, noncancerous
skin tumors.

   "Gene therapy may be one of the important avenues," said Viren Mehta, a
securities analyst with Mehta & Isaly World Wide Pharmaceutical Research. He
noted that a number of biotechnology companies were also studying recombinant
proteins and monoclonal antibodies.

   As for vaccines, there are two types: therapeutic, to slow or reverse the
disease, and preventive, for people at risk who test H.I.V. negative. "How to
test an AIDS vaccine on healthy people is a central ethical issue, " said Derek
Hodel, an expert with the AIDS Action Council, an advocacy coalition in
Washington. But Dr. Krim said that several nontoxic experimental vaccines were
ripe for testing.

   The National Institutes of Health urged the Defense Department last week to
organize simultaneous testing of several vaccines. Congress recently earmarked
$20 million for a vaccine under study by Microgenesys, based in Meriden, Conn.
The institutes also announced expanded tests of vaccines made by two California
companies, Genentech Inc., and Biocine, a joint venture of the Chiron
Corporation and Ciba-Geigy.

   Dr. Fauci said that a number of vaccines were "worth pursuing." But he added:
"As it stands now, we can't say we're on to something very impressive. Previous
vaccines failed when the virus mutated. Experts foresee at least three years of
testing and then two years of evaluation.

   Teena L. Lerner, an analyst at Lehman Brothers, agreed that many research
companies' strategies "turned out to be more complicated than originally
imagined." Some have lowered their priorities for AIDS, "but they are still
pushing ahead," she said, adding, "Small companies are still very willing to
commit capital in this area."

   AIDS activists insist that new approaches are needed. "We are still spending
too much money on first-generation anti-viral drugs and not helping to answer
basic research questions," said Mark Harrington, a patient advocate with the
Treatment Action Group, based in New York. "The N.I.H. has to lead before the
companies go after the answers."

   President-elect Clinton has spoken of naming a "czar" to direct AIDS research
and education efforts. But Martin Delaney, a San Francisco activist member of a
Federal AIDS advisory committee, opposes what he called "a research dictator."

   "If we give too much direction," he said, "there is a risk of missing the
target entirely." He called first for an evaluation by "key scientists and
outsiders, including experts on problem-solving and goal analysis from
industry." The Federal bureaucracy is slow and clumsy, he said. "Maybe we're
asking an elephant to tap dance."


GRAPHIC: Drawing.

LOAD-DATE: December 8, 1992


                             1324 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                December 8, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Page 3; Column 2; Science Desk

LENGTH: 558 words

HEADLINE: Wider Human Testing Ahead for Drastic Gene Therapy

BYLINE: By NATALIE ANGIER

BODY:

   THE first patient to be treated for a fatal cholesterol disease by receiving
new genes in her liver tissue is faring so well that the scientist who devised
the gene therapy technique wants to try it on others.

   Dr. James M. Wilson of the University of Michigan Medical School in Ann
Arbor, reporting to the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee of the National
Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Md., last week, presented the preliminary
results of a radical new method for treating familial hypercholesterolemia, a
rare inherited disorder that results in extensive cholesterol buildup throughout
the body and early death, usually from a heart attack. The patient, a
29-year-old woman from Quebec, underwent the drastic therapeutic operation last
June, when about 15 percent of her liver was cut out, and the excised cells
supplied with copies of an essential gene the woman lacked. The altered cells
were then reintroduced into the woman's liver through the portal vein that feeds
the organ.

    The gene directs the production of a protein called the low-density
lipoprotein receptor, the body's sponge for harmful cholesterol.

   Before gene therapy, said Dr. Wilson, the patient had blood levels of
dangerous cholesterol that were three times normal. Her arteries were already
perilously clogged with thick, yellowish plaque, bypass surgery of three years
ago was beginning to fail, and standard cholesterol-lowering drugs had little
impact on her condition.

   Six months after therapy, he said, the woman's cholesterol concentration had
dropped significantly, by 20 to 40 percent, to the point where the researchers
hoped drugs would bring her cholesterol level into the normal range. The woman
began taking medication three weeks ago, said Dr. Wilson, and it is starting to
take effect. A recent liver biopsy showed that the introduced receptor gene was
operating vigorously in the woman's body.

'Procedure Seems to Work'

    Given the extraordinary power of the liver to regenerate, the scientists
hope that the altered cells will divide and repopulate much of the gap in the
organ left by the initial operation.

   "The procedure seems to work," said Dr. Nelson Wivel, director of the
Recombinant DNA Committee. "Whether it will work over the long run, and whether
the woman's cholesterol levels will be up to preoperation levels six months from
now, I don't think anybody knows yet."

   Nevertheless, the committee was encouraged enough by the early results to
give Dr. Wilson permission to attempt the procedure on four other patients.
Among the people he is considering for therapy are children as young as 7. He
hopes that by getting to patients early enough, he can prevent cholesterol
buildup from devastating the body's arteries in the first place. He and others
also believe that the technique of adding genes to liver tissue, once perfected,
may prove an excellent method for treating a large number of enzymatic and
metabolic disorders, including lipid storage diseases and disorders that prevent
the body from breaking sugar down into usable forms.

   Dr. Wilson, who also received permission last week to attempt another type of
gene therapy on cystic fibrosis patients, is moving his entire operation to the
University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia next spring, where he will be running
a new Institute for Human Gene Therapy.

LOAD-DATE: December 8, 1992


                             1325 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1992 The Buffalo News
                            Buffalo News (New York)



                    December 6, 1992, Sunday, Final Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 907 words

HEADLINE: GENENTECH HOPING FOR NEW BLOCKBUSTER IN ITS DRUG TO TREAT CYSTIC
FIBROSIS

BYLINE: By MARIANN CAPRINO, Associated Press

DATELINE: NEW YORK

BODY:

    Biotech leader Genentech Inc., a conspicuous success in an industry typified
by productless companies, is gearing up for its next potential blockbuster -- a
drug to treat cystic fibrosis.

   Genentech last week completed final clinical trials for DNase, its drug for
cystic fibrosis, a congenital respiratory disease that at any one time afflicts
30,000 Americans, killing most by age 30.

   Genentech will submit its application for Food and Drug Administration
approval in the first quarter of 1993, and the company is working overtime to
complete an advanced manufacturing plant that can make large quantities of
Pulmozyme, the drug's commercial name.

   Much rests on DNase's success. Genentech's two leading drugs are facing new
challenges in the market. The government has given the green light to
researchers to find a cure for cystic fibrosis using experimental gene-therapy
procedures, which, if successful, could hurt DNase down the road.

   Analysts have predicted DNase sales could reach $ 500 million by the late
1990s for cystic fibrosis alone, even more if the drug is found effective in
treating other respiratory ailments like chronic bronchitis, which affects
millions.

   DNase "is the most important product in Genentech's development pipeline,"
said Linda Miller, a managing director at PaineWebber Inc. "They have a rich
pipeline that any biotech or drug company would envy, but there's nothing so
finished and as promising as DNase."

   DNase improves lung functions and reduces the incidence of infection in
cystic fibrosis patients. "Because there is a slowdown in deterioration, it may
result in prolonging life," but that hasn't been proven, said Genentech Chairman
G. Kirk Raab in an interview.

   Meanwhile, he said gene therapy, while very exciting, "is nothing new to us"
and does not pose a threat to DNase. "It is pioneer medicine, and how long it
will take to make available to patients and whether it will be safe and
effective, the jury is completely out on that."

   The technique involves replacing defective cystic fibrosis genes in the
breathing passages. If it works, it would correct a genetic flaw that causes
respiratory symptoms and might cure the most lethal element of the disease.  But
even the most optimistic say it would take at least six years until any gene
therapy treatment is widely available.

   " 'Cure' is too strong a word," Miller said of gene therapy, though she noted
that successful treatment could mean a brief "window of opportunity" for DNase.
Meanwhile, the drug has an opportunity to become the leader in treating symptoms
of cystic fibrosis.

   Genentech needs another winner. The two key products that generate all the
company's revenue "are a bit questionable in terms of their ability to grow or
even maintain the size of their markets," said Miller, referring to Protropin
and Activase.

   In 1991, sales of Protropin, a human growth hormone used to treat abnormally
small children, totaled about $ 185 million. The drug's orphan drug status -- a
guarantee of seven years of market exclusivity because it treats a rare disease
-- expired in October.

   "Others are trying to get into the market," Raab conceded, though Protropin
has a 70 percent share. Eli Lilly & Co. already makes a similar growth hormone
called Humatrope. Both companies are expected to be shielded from further
competition until Humatrope's orphan drug status expires in early 1994.

   Also, sales have been declining for Activase, which dissolves clots in heart
attack victims. Last year's sales of $ 196 million were off 7 percent from 1989
as the cardiology community challenged the drug's $ 2,200-per-dose price.

   "It is well known that streptokinase, a much cheaper but possibly equally
effective product, has been gaining market share," said a report by Joseph
Edelman, an analyst with Prudential Securities Inc.

   Genentech has spent about $ 55 million financing a major study comparing
Activase to streptokinase, made by Hoechst AG and costs about $ 300 a dose, and
other drugs.

   Raab said favorable results from the study, to be completed in April, could
result in increased market share for Activase.

   Raab says he isn't worried. Neither are investors. Genentech stock currently
is trading very near $ 39 a share, its 52-week high.

LOAD-DATE: December 23, 1992


                             1326 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                 December 6, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 1; Page 27; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 215 words

HEADLINE: Panel Backs a 3d Plan To Curb Cystic Fibrosis

BYLINE: AP

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 5

BODY:

   A Federal advisory panel on Friday recommended approval of a third proposal
to treat cystic fibrosis with experimental gene therapy. The panel approved two
similar proposals on Thursday.

   The three research teams would replace defective cystic fibrosis genes in the
breathing passages of a small number of patients under plans recommended by the
Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee of the National Institutes of Health. If the
technique works, it will correct a genetic flaw that might cure the most lethal
element of the disease.

    The advisory committee on Friday approved a proposal by Dr. Michael J. Welsh
of the University of Iowa. On Thursday, it approved gene therapy proposals by
Dr. Ronald G. Crystal of the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, and by
Dr. James M. Wilson of the University of Michigan.

   Before the experiments can begin, the three researchers must have final
approval from Dr. Bernadine P. Healy, director of the National Institutes of
Health, and from the Food and Drug Administration.

   All three researchers plan to use a genetically altered cold virus to try to
correct the flawed cystic fibrosis gene. The cold viruses have been engineered
to carry the normal gene and have been rendered unable to reproduce, or cause
infection, in the patients.

LOAD-DATE: December 6, 1992


                             1327 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1992 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    December 5, 1992, Saturday, City Edition

SECTION: ECONOMY; Pg. 29

LENGTH: 526 words

HEADLINE: Genzyme to test genetic cystic fibrosis therapy

BYLINE: By Ronald Rosenberg, Globe Staff

BODY:

    Genzyme Corp. and two academic research institutions yesterday received the
green light from a federal advisory panel to begin clinical trials of their
experimental gene therapy for cystic fibrosis.

   The disease, which affects 30,000 Americans and occurs in one of every 2,000
to 3,000 child births, is caused by a mutation in the gene encoding a cell
membrane protein. The result is difficult breathing and frequent infections as
airway passages are clogged by a thick mucus. Repeated infections in the lungs
often leads to death.

   Three research groups, each working independently, have developed drug
therapies that contain normal genes that are expected to overcome the flawed
gene responsible for cystic fibrosis. Each group is using a cold virus to
deliver the normal genes into cystic fibrosis patients. Their drug systems will
not cause infection but still invade targeted cells to produce a key missing
protein, according to research theory.

   "We hope to start our first clinical trials in January," said Henri Termeer,
president of Cambridge-based Genzyme, which is committing more than $ 300
million to find a cure to cystic fibrosis. Genzyme is working with the the
University of Iowa.

   Termeer estimates that if the Genzyme/University of Iowa gene therapy proves
successful and is approved by the US Food and Drug Administration, the earliest
availability to cystic fibrosis patients would be 1997.

   Genyzme is working with the Howard Hughes Medical Institute at the University
of Iowa Medical School and is the only corporation in the three groups working
on a gene therapy program.

   The other two, also expected to start clinical trials early next year, are
the National Heart Lung and Blood Institute in Bethesda, Md., an agency of the
National Institutes of Health; and the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor,
which is also the research headquarters for the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation.

   Yesterday's consent of each group's human gene therapy study plans by an
advisory panel of the National Institutes of Health is expected to be approved
by the FDA.

   Early next year all three groups will launch human clinical trials on a total
of 25 patients, said Carolyn Habbersett, medical editor at the Cystic Fibrosis
Foundation in Bethesda.

   "Within the research community and families of cystic fibrosis children and
young adults, the federal approval gives us lots of new hope," she said.

   Part of the optimism is due to the 1989 discovery of the gene that causes the
dreaded disease, followed by the the ability to make copies of it in laboratory
a year later. In 1991 scientists at all three academic institutions were able to
infect laboratory mice and monkeys with the bad gene and successfully test their
gene therapy drugs. Their scientific results, which they shared, prompted them
to seek permissions for the testing in humans that they received yesterday.

   Earlier this week Genentech Corp. of San Francisco presented clinical data of
its drug, DNase, that is aimed at treating the symptoms of cystic fibrosis. The
company reported no major side effects and said its drug reduces the rate of
respiratory infection.

LOAD-DATE: December 7, 1992


                             1328 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1992 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                    December 5, 1992, Saturday, Home Edition

SECTION: Business; Part D; Page 3; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 796 words

HEADLINE: GENENTECH'S NEXT BIG BET: NEW CYSTIC FIBROSIS DRUG;
BIOTECHNOLOGY: DNASE COULD BECOME A LEADER IN TREATING SYMPTOMS OF THE
CONGENITAL DISEASE.

BYLINE: From Associated Press

DATELINE: NEW YORK

BODY:

   Biotech leader Genentech Inc. is gearing up for its next potential
blockbuster -- a drug to treat cystic fibrosis.

   This week, Genentech completed final clinical trials for DNase, its drug for
cystic fibrosis, a congenital respiratory disease that at any one time afflicts
30,000 Americans, killing most by age 30.

   Genentech will submit its application for Food and Drug Administration
approval within the first quarter of 1993, and the company is working overtime
to complete an advanced manufacturing plant that can make large quantities of
Pulmozyme, the drug's commercial name.

   Much rests on DNase's success. Genentech's two leading drugs are facing new
challenges in the market. The government has given the green light to
researchers to find a cure for cystic fibrosis using experimental gene-therapy
procedures, which, if successful, could hurt DNase down the road.

   Analysts have predicted DNase sales could reach $500 million by the late
1990s for cystic fibrosis alone, even more if the drug is found effective in
treating other respiratory ailments such as chronic bronchitis, which affects
millions.

   DNase "is the most important product in Genentech's development pipeline,"
said Linda Miller, a managing director at PaineWebber Inc. "They have a rich
pipeline that any biotech or drug company would envy, but there's nothing so
finished and as promising as DNase."

   DNase improves lung functions and reduces the incidence of infection in
cystic fibrosis patients. "Because there is a slowdown in deterioration, it may
result in prolonging life," but that hasn't been proven, Genentech Chairman G.
Kirk Raab said in an interview.

   Meanwhile, he said gene therapy, while very exciting, "is nothing new to us"
and does not pose a threat to DNase. "It is pioneer medicine, and how long it
will take to make available to patients and whether it will be safe and
effective, the jury is completely out on that."

   The technique involves replacing defective cystic fibrosis genes in the
breathing passages. If it works, it would correct a genetic flaw that causes
respiratory symptoms and might cure the most lethal element of the disease. But
even the most optimistic say it will take at least six years until any
gene-therapy treatment is widely available.

   "'Cure is too strong a word," Miller said of gene therapy, though she noted
that successful treatment could mean a brief "window of opportunity" for DNase.
Meanwhile, the drug has an opportunity to become the leader in treating symptoms
of cystic fibrosis.

   Genentech needs another winner. The two key products that generate all the
company's revenue "are a bit questionable in terms of their ability to grow or
even maintain the size of their markets," said Miller, referring to Protropin
and Activase.

   In 1991, sales of Protropin, a human growth hormone used to treat abnormally
small children, totaled about $185 million. The drug's orphan drug status -- a
guarantee of seven years of market exclusivity because it treats a rare disease
-- expired in October.

   "Others are trying to get into the market," Raab conceded, though Protropin
has a 70% share. Eli Lilly & Co. already makes a similar growth hormone called
Humatrope. Both companies are expected to be shielded from further competition
until Humatrope's orphan drug status expires in early 1994.

   On another front, sales have been declining for Activase, which dissolves
clots in heart attack victims. Last year's sales of $196 million were off 7%
from 1989 as the cardiology community challenged the drug's $2,200-per-dose
price.

   "It is well known that streptokinase, a much cheaper but possibly equally
effective product, has been gaining market share," said a report by Joseph
Edelman, an analyst with Prudential Securities Inc.

   Genentech has spent about $55 million financing a major study comparing
Activase to streptokinase, which is made by Hoechst and costs about $300 a dose,
and other drugs.

   Raab said favorable results from the study, to be completed in April, could
result in increased market share for Activase.

   "When the battle is over, we can dedicate ourselves to working with the
cardiology community and emergency room physicians so that more patients receive
the drug," Raab said. In the United States, of the heart attack patients who
could benefit from Activase, only 20% receive the drug, compared to 40% in
Europe.

   Raab said he isn't worried. Neither are investors. Genentech stock is now
trading very near $39 a share, its 52-week high.

   "For a young biotech company -- even though we're the old one -- the future
has always been less than perfectly clear," Raab said. "But we have two very
successful products on the market. I see DNase as very exciting, and there are
lots of other products in the pipeline."


                             1329 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 1992 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                           December 5, 1992 Saturday
                                 FOURTH Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D11

LENGTH: 447 words

HEADLINE: GENENTECH HOPES FOR BLOCKBUSTER WITH CYSTIC FIBROSIS DRUG

BYLINE: MARIANN CAPRINO, The Associated Press <

DATELINE: NEW YORK

BODY:

   Saturday, December 5, 1992 GENENTECH HOPES FOR BLOCKBUSTER WITH CYSTIC
FIBROSIS DRUG

   Summary: The biotechnology company is working hard to submit its  application
for approval of DNase soon

   Biotech leader Genentech Inc., a conspicuous success in an industry  typified
by productless companies, is gearing up for its next potential  blockbuster -- a
drug to treat cystic fibrosis.

   This week Genentech completed final clinical trials for DNase, its drug for
cystic fibrosis, a congenital respiratory disease that at any one time  afflicts
30,000 Americans, killing most by the age of 30.

   Genentech will submit its application for Food and Drug Administration
approval within the first quarter of 1993, and the company is working overtime
to complete an advanced manufacturing plant that can make large quantities of
Pulmozyme, the drug's commercial name.

   Much rests on DNase's success. Genentech's two leading drugs are facing new
challenges in the market. And the government has given the green light to
researchers to find a cure for cystic fibrosis using experimental gene-therapy
procedures. If they are successful, they could hurt DNase down the road.

   Analysts have predicted sales of DNase could reach $500 million by the late
1990s for cystic fibrosis alone -- even more if the drug is found effective in
treating other respiratory ailments, such as chronic bronchitis, which affects
millions.

   DNase improves lung functions and reduces the incidence of infection in
cystic fibrosis patients. ``Because there is a slowdown in deterioration, it
may result in prolonging life,'' but that hasn't been proven, said Genentech
Chairman G. Kirk Raab in an interview.

   Genentech needs another winner. The two key products that generate all the
company's revenue ``are a bit questionable in terms of their ability to grow  or
even maintain the size of their markets,'' said Miller, referring to  Protropin
and Activase.

   In 1991, sales of Protropin, a human growth hormone used to treat  abnormally
small children, totaled about $185 million. The medicine's ``orphan drug''
status -- a guarantee of seven years of market exclusivity because it  treats a
rare disease -- expired in October.

   ``Others are trying to get into the market,'' Raab conceded.

   On another front, sales have been declining for Activase, which dissolves
clots in heart attack victims. Last year's sales of $196 million were off 7
percent from 1989 as the cardiology community challenged the drug's
$2,200-per-dose price.

   ``It is well known that streptokinase, a much cheaper but possibly equally
effective product, has been gaining market share,'' said a report by Joseph
Edelman, an analyst with Prudential Securities Inc.

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 2006


                             1330 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1992 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                     December 5, 1992 Saturday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 6A

LENGTH: 393 words

HEADLINE: OK EXPECTED FOR GENE TESTS ;
CYSTIC FIBROSIS GROUP ANXIOUS FOR RESULTS

BYLINE: ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   Three researchers' plans to treat a small number of cystic fibrosis patients
by inserting corrective genes into their breathing passages were endorsed by a
National Institutes of Health advisory committee yesterday.

   Before the work can begin, it must be approved by NIH director Dr.
Bernardine Healy and by the Food and Drug Administration. Both are expected to
act quickly.

   "I expect to get started in January," said Dr. Michael J. Welsh, a University
of Iowa scientist whose CF gene therapy proposal was one of three approved this
week. "We would expect to get some indication of the effects within a few
weeks."

   Cystic fibrosis is the most common inherited lethal disease among Americans
of European ancestry. Some 30,000 Americans have the disease, and it is
diagnosed in about one in every 2,000 babies born.

   An official of the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation, which has spent $50 million on
CF gene research and now is enjoying a potential payoff, said he was optimistic
about the experimental therapy but said his organization will continue to
support research into alternate forms of gene treatment.

   The NIH Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee voted yesterday to recommend that
Welsh be permitted to try his experimental technique on three CF patients.

   On Thursday, the committee endorsed the human gene therapy proposed by Ronald
G. Crystal of the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, an NIH agency, and
by James M. Wilson of the University of Michigan. Crystal will use his technique
on 10 patients, and Wilson on 12.

   Cystic fibrosis is caused by a gene flaw that prevents the body from properly
processing chloride. As a result, thick mucus accumulates in the lungs,
intestines and pancreas. In the lungs, the mucus interferes with breathing and
fosters frequent infections.

   Failure of the lungs after repeated infections is the most common cause of
death. Once CF patients seldom survived into adulthood, but new treatments have
added years of life.

   All three researchers plan to overcome the effects of a flawed CF gene by
inserting normal CF genes into patients.

   Welsh's system calls for the altered cold virus to be applied to nose tissue
of the CF patients. If the technique is proven safe and effective, then Welsh
would attempt to deliver the normal gene to the lungs of CF patients.

LOAD-DATE: July 8, 1994


                             1331 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1992 The Buffalo News
                            Buffalo News (New York)



                     December 4, 1992, Friday, City Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 146 words

HEADLINE: CYSTIC FIBROSIS RESEARCH APPROVED

DATELINE: WASHINGTON (AP)

BODY:

    An experimental gene therapy treatment that holds promise of a cure for
cystic fibrosis, the most common inherited fatal disease, has been approved by a
federal advisory committee.

   The Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee of the National Institutes of Health
recommended that two researchers be given permission to try to replace defective
cystic fibrosis genes in the lung cells of a few patients.

   If the technique works as hoped, it could correct the genetic flaw that
causes respiratory cystic fibrosis symptoms and, thus, possibly cure the most
lethal element of the disease.

LOAD-DATE: December 23, 1992


                             1332 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1992 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

                  December 4, 1992, FRIDAY , LATE SPORTS FINAL

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. 106

LENGTH: 1510 words

HEADLINE: Fund-Raiser Set For Hirschbeck

BYLINE: Steve Rosenbloom

BODY:


   John Hirschbeck is an American League umpire, which means someone is always
mad at him. In his line of work, he's never the home team and he's never on the
winning side. Satisfaction comes only if no one notices he's there.

    But that enforced isolation never prepared Hirschbeck for the
life-threatening situation his family is enduring.

    So, tomorrow at a downtown hotel, some of the greatest players in baseball
will rally around the family of a man whose job makes him everyone's enemy.

    Hirschbeck's story began last April on Opening Day.

    "Just before I was supposed to go on the field for the game," Hirschbeck
said, "I found out."

    What Hirschbeck found out from his wife, Denise, was that his son, John,
then 7, had a rare, genetic brain disease. Adrenoleukodystrophy (ALD) is what
the doctors call it. There is no known cure.

    John was given a year to live.

    "My heart just dropped," Hirschbeck said. "We were devastated. To hear that
there's nothing that can be done. . . .

    "I just wanted to hold him and hold him and keep holding him and never let
him go. It was the worst feeling in the world. I wanted to die right there."

    Hirschbeck would hold his son and wonder. Sure, John had displayed some
strange behavior - a lack of interest, falling grades, some clumsiness - but
here was a big, strapping kid who came up to dad's chest. Something was wrong,
but this?

    "We had no idea," Hirschbeck said.

    Who would? Sixteen years ago, ALD didn't even have a name and even now, it
is so rare that fewer than 200 cases are active in the United States and Canada,
according to the United Leukodystrophy Foundation in Sycamore, Ill.

    ALD breaks down the insulation around the fiber of the central nervous
system. It often is misdiagnosed as encephalitis or cerebral palsy. Symptoms
include loss of motor skills and cerebral abilities, impaired vision and a
shortened attention span. There is no physical pain, but it is mysterious,
debilitating and attacks quickly.

    "They told us to take him home and just enjoy whatever time we had left with
him," Denise said. "But I started getting on the phone."

    She called Dr. Hugo Moser, an authority on the disease at the
Kennedy-Krieger Institute at Johns Hopkins University in Maryland. Moser
believes he has the ALD gene isolated and has begun working on gene therapy to
find a cure. The Hirschbecks hoped he could help them find a bone-marrow donor,
the only remedy that offered even a hint of optimism.

    "He said there wasn't much hope for John," Hirschbeck said.

    Unrelenting, the Hirschbecks sought out Dr. William Krivit, an oncologist at
the University of Minnesota children's hospital. Krivit had performed seven of
the 17 bone-marrow transplants done on ALD patients. At the same time, blood
work was started on the Hirschbecks' other three children.

    "I never had a fear that the other kids would have it," Hirschbeck, 38,
said.

    He was wrong.

    Michael, then 5, had ALD, too.

    Then, daughters Erin, 4, and Megan, 1, were diagnosed as carriers.

    "They were overwhelmed by the agony of the news," Moser, 68, said. "When I
first told them, Mr. Hirschbeck broke down and cried. It's been the shock of
their lives."

    Research indicates only boys suffer the degenerative effects of the disease.
Girls, though, are the carriers. Denise, 34, apparently passed along the ALD
gene to her children, Moser said. Denise's mother had a brother who died at age
7 in the 1930s from what was presumed to be encephalitis but actually was ALD.

    "My mother really felt badly because she was the carrier," Denise said. "I
don't want to say I felt guilty because it was kind of out of our hands."

    The Hirschbecks were traveling from their home in Ohio to Minnesota every
other Wednesday in May and June for tests on one son or the other. And instead
of needing just one bone-marrow donor, they needed two.

    Fortunately, Megan, the baby, was a perfect match for Michael. Although such
a transplant never had been done with a known carrier, Megan had two things
going for her: There is a greater chance of success with a sibling and, clearly,
she was available.

    That decision behind him, Hirschbeck, a 10-year major league veteran,
returned to umpiring for three weeks while preparations were made for Michael's
transplant.

    "I'm really glad I went back, because it's good to know that I can work
under those circumstances," Hirschbeck said. "I'm going to have to do it in the
future."

    Oakland A's manager Tony LaRussa heard all this and was stunned. So were the
handful of Oakland players who were in the dugout on July 4 when Hirschbeck
explained why he had missed the first half of the season.

    LaRussa began organizing a fund-raiser to ease the Hirschbecks' enormous
financial burden. He enlisted longtime friend Dr. Ed Lewis, an Orland Park
veterinarian, and together they arranged "Baseball's Day for the Hirschbeck
Family." The event, which will take place tomorrow at the Palmer House Hilton,
features some of the sport's biggest names.

    "It's a testament to the way John has done his job for 10 years," said
LaRussa, the former White Sox manager. "He comes across as a guy who works hard,
and these guys respect him enough to show up."

    There will be autograph sessions during the day featuring the Cubs' Ryne
Sandberg, the White Sox' Jack McDowell and Bo Jackson, Texas' Jose Canseco,
Oakland's Mark McGwire, Milwaukee's Robin Yount, Minnesota's Kirby Puckett and
more than 20 others. In the evening, the same stars will sit with fans for
dinner and a silent auction.

    "I've heard from collectors that this is the greatest number of stars to
show up at one event," LaRussa said. "You're talk ing about guys like Sandberg
and Yount. These guys never show up for these shows. But they all wanted to jump
on a plane for this.

    "I'd be disappointed if we didn't raise a couple hundred-thousand dollars."

    One interesting sidelight to the event will be a LaRussa-Canseco reunion.
The two traded barbs after Canseco was traded to Texas last August.

    "We haven't talked since," LaRussa said. "But that enforced silence will
end. We will talk that night."

    Indeed, it will be an evening for perspective.

    The day of the All-Star Game, July 15, the Hirschbecks uprooted to Minnesota
for Michael's transplant. After 10 days of tests, it was time.

    "We sat down with Michael the day before in the hospital and said, 'Your
brother is very sick,"' Hirschbeck said. "He said, 'Yeah, I know.' We said, 'We
have a chance to help you. By going in the hospital, doctors can do something to
save you. And Mom and Dad will be with you the whole time."'

    The Hirschbecks lived in Minneapolis for three months. Denise's mother
stayed with them for the first six weeks, Hirschbeck's mother for the second
six. Family members went to the hospital in shifts so Michael was never alone.

    That was the easy part.

    "Since we came home (to Ohio), being in our own house with just the family
there, I've had a lot of time to think about John," Hirschbeck said. "One of the
hardest things about being home is driving by the school he should be at or
seeing a school bus."

    The good news is that Michael's neurological tests show improvement. For
reasons doctors can't explain, Michael's deterioration has stopped. In the
critical first 100 days, Michael's immune system and heart are responding. He's
tested weekly and must swallow as many as 30 pills a day, but doctors say there
is 100 percent acceptance of the marrow.

    If the chemotherapy hadn't caused Michael to lose his hair, you'd never know
this cheerful youngster is fighting a disease that's killing his brother.

    "I'm fine," Michael chirps.

    By February, barring any sickness, he'll be able to attend kindergarten. By
next July, when he returns to the University of Minnesota hospital for extensive
tests, Michael might be given all that any ALD patient could hope for - cautious
optimism.

    John, meanwhile, continues to undergo tests and has suffered through five
spinal taps in seven months. He is slipping quickly and has the functional
awareness of a 2-year-old.

    "When we go out to the garage to get into the car, we'll say, 'John, get in
the car,' " Hirschbeck said somberly. "The door will be open, but he doesn't
know what to do. We have to brush his teeth, tie his shoes for him.

    "The other night when we were putting them to bed, Michael said, 'Don't
worry, Mom. If John can't get to the bathroom, I'll help him.' "

    Hirschbeck's voice breaks. He turns away. He desperately wants things to
return to normal. He knows they never will.

    When there are idle moments, and Hirschbeck still asks the question every
parent - every person - would ask.

    "I'm going to ask 'Why?' forever . . . and I'll never get an answer,"
Hirschbeck said. "God's got to have a reason for it, but I don't know what it
is. I want to believe that if John has to die, he's going to be with God in a
better place than we are. I'll just be glad for the eight years I had with him."

LOAD-DATE: December 31, 1992


                             1333 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1992 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

                  December 4, 1992, FRIDAY , LATE SPORTS FINAL

SECTION: NEWS; NATION BRIEFINGS; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 651 words

BODY:
 PRIEST SEX CASE SETTLED: A settlement with the Roman Catholic Church was
announced Thursday by a lawyer for 68 people who charged a priest sexually
abused them three decades ago in the Fall River (Mass.) Diocese. James Porter,
who this year admitted having molested as many as 100 children in the 1960s in
several states, faces dozens of criminal indictments but was not a party to the
civil settlement reached in Boston. Roderick MacLeish, the group's attorney,
said both sides agreed to keep the details confidential. The settlement was
expected to result not only in substantial monetary damages but also changes in
church policy.  ABANDONMENT CONVICTIONS: A woman who took her
Alzheimer's-afflicted father from a nursing home and abandoned him at a dog
track 320 miles away was found guilty Thursday by a judge in Hillsboro, Ore., of
kidnapping, theft, perjury and unlawfully seeking public aid. Sue Gifford, 41,
left John Kingery, 83, with a bag of diapers next to his wheelchair March 21 at
the track near Post Falls, Idaho. Kingery died Nov. 2 in a Morgantown, Ky.,
nursing home, where children from his first marriage placed him after
recognizing him from news reports. Gifford was not immediately sentenced.
PACKWOOD PROBE PUSH: Common Cause, a nonpartisan group that monitors Congress,
urged Thursday that the Senate ethics committee hire an outside counsel to
investigate sexual harassment allegations against Sen. Bob Packwood (R-Ore.).
"Very serious questions have been raised about the committee's performance in
upholding and enforcing Senate ethics rules and standards," Fred Wertheimer,
Common Cause's president, said in a letter to the panel. At least 15 women -
Senate employees, lobbyists and campaign workers among them - have accused
Packwood of making advances that sometimes included unwanted contact. Coming to
his defense was feminist Gloria Steinem, who said Packwood has been "a
courageous champion" for women during his career and should not be judged
hastily.  FIBROSIS TESTS CLEARED: A National Institutes of Health advisory
committee gave first-time approval Thursday to human gene-therapy experiments
for treating cystic fibrosis, the nation's most common lethal hereditary
disease. Until now, the revolutionary technique has been applied only against
rare illnesses and for patients already in the terminal stage of skin cancer,
researchers said.  SUICIDE-AID BAN OKd: Michigan senators Thursday sent to Gov.
John Engler on a 24-6 vote House-passed legislation that would temporarily ban
assisted suicides and is designed to block activities of the retired pathologist
known as the "death doctor." Dr. Jack Kevorkian has overseen the suicides of six
women in two years, but the state has no law to support prosecution. Under the
bill, effective next spring, anyone who helped someone commit suicide in
Michigan would face up to four years in prison and a $ 2,000 fine. A 22-member
commission would have 15 months to come up with a final recommendation.
ASTRONAUTS GO PUBLIC: Discovery's crew of five, fresh from releasing a secret
military satellite, began the open-to-the-public portion of their seven-day
space mission Thursday by trying out an Army laser receiver and testing a new
camera system known as Hercules. The camera is designed to pinpoint latitudes
and longitudes within 2.3 miles of spots on Earth. Before taking a picture,
astronauts aim the camera at two established stars so the system can determine
the image's bearing in space. More than 140 targets worldwide, including cities,
islands, mountains and volcanoes, have been selected to help test the system
during its first shuttle flight.  DRUNKEN DRIVER TOLL DIPS: Fatal traffic
crashes caused by drunken drivers dropped nearly 10 percent between 1990 and
1991, when the toll of about 19,900 was the lowest in at least a decade, the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said Thursday.

LOAD-DATE: December 31, 1992


                             1334 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1992 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                     December 4, 1992, Friday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 4; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 559 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY OKD FOR CYSTIC FIBROSIS PATIENTS;
HEALTH: FEDERAL PANEL'S APPROVAL OF EXPERIMENTS WILL BE TECHNIQUE'S FIRST TEST
AGAINST A WIDESPREAD DISEASE.

BYLINE: By EDWIN CHEN, TIMES STAFF WRITER

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   A scientific panel Thursday gave its approval for experimental gene-therapy
treatments of cystic fibrosis patients, marking the first time the revolutionary
but still-developing technique will be tried against so prevalent and lethal a
disease.

   The unanimous approval by the federal Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee
underscores the accelerating pace of gene-therapy experiments. Until now, they
had been tried only against a handful of extremely rare genetic diseases and a
few types of cancers for which there are no cures.

   "This is a major watershed event," said Dr. Nelson A. Wivel, executive
secretary of the committee.

   In a related development, researchers in Pittsburgh, Pa., this week reported
promising laboratory results with a potential gene therapy for gaucher's
disease, a rare but disabling hereditary ailment.

   The federal panel's decision Thursday comes only three years after scientists
discovered the genetic defect responsible for cystic fibrosis, an inherited
respiratory disease that currently afflicts about 30,000 Americans and kills
most of its victims before age 30.

   And it was only three months ago that scientists in North Carolina learned
how to breed mice that develop cystic fibrosis -- a major breakthrough that also
will expedite the search for a cure.

   Although the experimental gene treatments cannot begin until after final
approval is received from the Food and Drug Administration and the National
Institutes of Health, it is highly unlikely either organization would reject the
panel's decision.

   The treatments are tentatively scheduled to start in 1993 with an initial
group of 10 patients. The procedure will involve replacing defective cystic
fibrosis genes in lung cells with normal genes.

   One point of controversy on Thursday was the unusual delivery system for
normal genes to replace cystic fibrosis genes: Patients will be given a nasal
application of a common cold virus, into which normal genes have been inserted.
Researchers expect the virus to spread and invade the lung tissue, with the
normal genes replacing the defective ones.

   Some panelists expressed concern about possible side effects from the
procedure. But the research team, led by Dr. Ronald G. Crystal, chief of the
pulmonary branch of the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, succeeded in
convincing the group that the technique is not likely to cause illness among
either patients or health care personnel.

   "It's a low-risk situation, but the benefits are high," said panelist Roy H.
Doi, a biochemistry professor at UC Davis.

   Crystal urged families of cystic fibrosis patients not to raise their hopes
too high. While the treatments will benefit the patients who receive them, it is
not known how long the effects will last.

   Gene therapy has two basic approaches. In one, researchers introduce a normal
gene into a patient in an attempt to replace a missing gene or to correct a
defective one -- as in the cystic fibrosis treatments. In the other, scientists
design an altered gene that, once introduced into a patient, will assign a cell
a new function or enhance an existing function.

   The first of the ongoing experimental gene-therapy treatments involved an
extremely rare disease called adenosine deaminase deficiency, which afflicts no
more than perhaps 20 people at any time worldwide, according to Wivel.


                             1335 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                 December 4, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 28; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 891 words

HEADLINE: Panel Permits Use of Genes In Treating Cystic Fibrosis

BYLINE: By NATALIE ANGIER

BODY:

   Two teams won approval from a Federal panel yesterday to treat cystic
fibrosis by inserting sturdy new genes into the patients' frail and beleagured
airway tissue, a scheme that if successful could amount to a cure for cystic
fibrosis, the most common lethal hereditary disease.

   The two teams take a very similar approach to rallying the power of human
gene therapy against the illness, and human trials could begin by early next
year.

    "I think this is a major step along the way, and after working so hard on
this for so long, I feel really good," said Dr. Ronald G. Crystal of the
National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute in Bethesda, Md. "The time is right to
cure this disease, and while I don't think we're going to be able to do that
immediately, we now have the potential for a cure."

   Dr. Crystal led one of the teams whose projects were approved yesterday by
the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee, the Federal panel that oversees gene
therapy research.

'Just a First Step'

    But other researchers and experts on cystic fibrosis cautioned against
overly buoyant expectations of success. Even if the therapy proves promising in
the initial clinical trials, they said, it will still take about six years
before it is widely available.

   "We're very encouraged," said Robert K. Dresing, president and chief
executive officer of the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation. "But this is very early
work, and it's just a first step toward getting that ultimate therapy."

   At any given time, cystic fibrosis afflicts about 30,000 Americans; many die
from the disease before they reach 30 years of age. Several new drugs designed
to ease the extreme mucus buildup and chronic lung infections often associated
with the disorder are now being tested, but none, if effective, would rank as a
cure.

   Dr. James Wilson of the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor led the second
group whose project was approved by the advisory committee. A third group,
headed by Dr. Michael Welsh of the Howard Hughes Medical Institute at the
University of Iowa, plans to offer a similar but somewhat more conservative gene
therapy method today. Its approval is believed to be likely.

F.D.A. Approval Also Needed

    The projects must next be authorized by Bernadine Healy, director of the
National Institutes of Health, who is expected to take her cue from the advisory
committee and the Food and Drug Administration.

   The three teams will try to deliver fresh copies of the crucial cystic
fibrosis gene to patients by packaging the gene in a harmless cold virus called
an adenovirus, and then, essentially, squirting the virus into the patients'
airways. Two teams will deliver the virus and the gene it enfolds to the
patients' nose and lungs, while Dr. Welsh's team, concerned about possible lung
inflammation from the treatment, will start with nasal administration alone.

   Preliminary results from animal and test tube experiments have been described
by many scientists as "impressive," although researchers say they will only know
how well the plan works by trying it on humans.

   Some doctors have expressed concern that using a cold virus as a delivery
vehicle for the gene carries risks that have not been sorted out, and some say
they would not immediately recommend such a treatment for patients who have only
a mild form of cystic fibrosis.

Risks Viewed as Minimal

    But Dr. Welsh said he believed that the risks of unexpected infections from
the adenovirus are minimal, and notes that the virus the scientists will be
using has been genetically manipulated to prevent it from reproducing once it
has entered a cell.

   "This is a lethal disease, and the chances that gene therapy will work are
high," Dr. Welsh said. "The potential benefits clearly outweigh any risks
involved."

   Mr. Dresing said he, too, believes the method is safe. "My own son, who has
cystic fibrosis, may very well volunteer for the early trials," he said. Mr.
Dresing's son is 24 years old.

   The current wealth of gene therapy offerings is no surprise, given the fervor
with which geneticists have been studying cystic fibrosis in the last several
years. Some researchers say the entire field of human gene therapy was
practically invented with the goal of thwarting cystic fibrosis in mind,
although the approach has already been tried against an immune disorder, a
lethal cholesterol defect and several types of cancer, with varying success.

   The teams plan to begin experiments with adult victims of the disease,
enlisting about 30 patients over the age of 21 for the early phases of the
trials. The scientists will give patients copies of the gene they lack, called
the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator.

   In its healthy guise, the gene directs cells to create a protein that
controls the body's flow of chloride molecules. Cystic fibrosis patients,
lacking that essential trafficking molecule, end up with a dangerous imbalance
of salt, which in turn leads to excessive mucus buildup in the lungs. The mucus
serves as a broth for chronic bacterial infections, and eventually the pulmonary
tissue gives out, leading to death.

   The researchers hope that the adenovirus delivery vehicles will infect about
10 percent of the cells of the airway tissue, installing just enough copies of
the cystic fibrosis gene to correct the defective chloride flow.

GRAPHIC: Diagram: "A Cold Virus to Carry a Missing Gene"

Cystic fibrosis patients lack a gene for a protein to control salt flow in lung
cells; mucus builds up and infections destroy tissue. Scientists will try a
replacement method that worked in animals

Adenovirus, which causes colds, is altered so it cannot reproduce.

Missing gene is inserted into virus.

The virus is to be delivered through the lung or nasal passage. In the lung
tissue, it is expected to infect about 10 percent of airway cells. The gene
should begin to work, producing the control protein, and mucus buildup should be
significantly reduced.

LOAD-DATE: December 4, 1992


                             1336 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1992 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                  December 4, 1992 Friday, FINAL/ SPORTS FINAL

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 4A

LENGTH: 107 words

HEADLINE: CYSTIC FIBROSIS CURE TO BE TRIED WASHINGTON

BYLINE: FROM WIRE REPORTS

BODY:

   An advisory committee to the National Institutes of Health recommended
approval yesterday for the first human gene therapy to treat cystic fibrosis.
The procedure offers the possibility of a cure for the most common lethal
hereditary disease, experts say.

   The Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee of the NIH recommended that two
researchers be given permission to attempt to replace defective cystic fibrosis
genes in the lungs of a small number of CF patients. A third researcher is to
seek approval of the committee today.

   If the procedures work, they could correct the genetic flaw that causes CF
and possibly cure the disease.

COLUMN: National Briefs

LOAD-DATE: February 1, 1993


                             1337 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                           Times Publishing Company
                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                     December 4, 1992, Friday, City Edition

SECTION: NATIONAL; MEDICAL DIGEST; Pg. 12A

LENGTH: 574 words

HEADLINE: Cystic fibrosis gene therapy approved

DATELINE: WASHINGTON; CHICAGO

BODY:


   A National Institutes of Health advisory committee Thursday approved for the

 first time human gene-therapy experiments to treat cystic fibrosis. The
approval signaled a new era for the technique, which has been applied only
against rare diseases and for patients with terminal skin cancer. Patients
would receive a nasal application of a common cold virus, into which normal CF
genes had been inserted. If the procedure works, the virus will invade lung
tissue, spreading the new genetic material and displacing lung cells carrying
the defective gene. The experiments must get final approval from the NIH
director and the Food and Drug Administration.

Techniques destroy inoperable tumors

CHICAGO - Inoperable liver and prostate cancer tumors have been successfully
destroyed by doses of heat or cold, researchers at Allegheny General Hospital
in Pittsburgh say. One technique employs ultrasound to guide a tube through  the
skin into the tumor. Liquid nitrogen - used for years to freeze and  destroy
warts - is injected through the tube to freeze and kill cancerous  tissue.
Researchers at Middlesex Hospital in London used laser-generated heat  on liver
tumors.

More promising cancer drug found

WASHINGTON - A new cancer drug, Taxotere, shows promise in combating ovarian
and breast cancer in early tests, researchers at the University of Texas'
Anderson Cancer Center say. Taxotere, being developed by Rhone-Poulenc Rorer,
is made from the needles of the European yew tree, which grows abundantly. It
is thought to be a cheaper and more accessible alternative to Bristol-Myers
Squibb's Taxol, which is made from the bark of the slow-growing and rare
Northwest Pacific yew.

Ultrasound could warn of stroke risk

CHICAGO - An ultrasound scan of the neck could provide an early clue to heart
disease and stroke risk 20 or 30 years before symptoms develop, researchers
say. Using ultrasound to check for plaque buildup may become an important
measure of cardiovascular health, said Daniel O'Leary of the Geisinger Clinic
in Danville, Pa. He said ultrasound examinations of the carotid arteries were
made on more than 5,000 people over the age of 65 in a continuing,
government-funded study.

Mammograms may indicate cancer risk

CHICAGO - It may be possible to predict a woman's future risk of breast cancer
by analyzing mammograms that show no sign of the disease, scientists say.
Researchers from the University of Toronto and the Ontario Cancer Center said
they compared the normal mammograms of 300 women who later developed breast
cancer with those of an equal number of women who did not and found that  "there
appears to be a distinct, measurable difference in breast tissue
characteristics between the two groups.

Study: Depression is up worldwide

CHICAGO - The incidence of mental depression has increased with each  generation
in the 20th century, across social and geographic lines, shows an  analysis of
studies of about 43,000 people in North America, Western Europe,  the Middle
East, Asia and the Pacific Rim from 1915 on. "A national effort to  improve the
assessment, recognition and treatment of depression has been  initiated . . . in
the United States. Our findings suggest that similar  efforts may be needed in
other parts of the world," said a report from  Columbia University.

LOAD-DATE: December 9, 1992


                             1338 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1992 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                    December 4, 1992, Friday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 461 words

HEADLINE: CYSTIC FIBROSIS TREATMENT

BYLINE: Arlene Vigoda

BODY:

    An advisory committee to the National Institutes of Health recommended
approval Thursday for the first human gene therapy to treat cystic fibrosis. If
the procedures work, they could correct the genetic flaw that causes CF and
possibly cure the disease.  Researchers will use a genetically engineered cold
virus that carries the normal CF gene. The virus, which has been altered so as
to not cause disease, will be sprayed into the breathing passages of the
patients. It is hoped that the cold viruses will then invade the lung cells and
replace the flawed CF gene. About 30,000 Americans have the disease and about
one in every 2,000 babies born annually are diagnosed with it.  The experiments
could start as early as January.

SAY SOMETHING: Maggie Simpson uncorked her pacifier Thursday on Fox's The
Simpsons to say her first word, voiced by Elizabeth Taylor. Babies Bart and Lisa
had called dad Homer, but the littlest Simpson said ''Daddy!''

TRAVELIN' MAN: Arsenio Hall heads to Washington, D.C., and Boston this weekend
for good causes: Saturday, he's joined by D.C. Mayor Sharon Pratt Kelly and
Jesse Jackson for two food giveaways; Sunday at Boston's Colonial Theater, he
hosts the first screening of his AIDS educational home video, Time Out: The
Truth About HIV, AIDS and You. And Monday, proclaimed AIDS Awareness Day in
Boston, Hall will attend another screening with Massachusetts Gov. William Weld.


 WHO'S WHO: Calling all pinball wizards. The producers of the Who's rock opera
Tommy are looking for singers to star in the Broadway musical, set to open April
22, 1993. Open auditions will be Saturday at 10 a.m. at the Minskoff Theater in
New York. Think you'd make a good Uncle Ernie or Cousin Kevin? Call 212-307-6690
.

 THE GIFT OF GIVING: Teen-agers - especially black teens - are volunteering
more, says a survey out Thursday. The national survey of 1,400 teen-agers
follows a similar study conducted two years ago, both by Independent Sector, a
non-profit coalition of more than 800 corporate, foundation and voluntary
organizations. Findings: 61% of teens volunteer an average of 3.2 hours per
week, compared with 58% in 1990. The percentage of black teens who volunteer
increased from 33% to 53%, more than any other population segment. Independent
Sector's Virginia Hodgkinson attributes the rise in part to ''a whole movement
among black churches'' to promote youth volunteerism and ''a growth of the black
middle class.''

 SOULFUL STRUT: Eddie Murphy and En Vogue will be special honorees at the
seventh Soul Train Music Awards, airing nationwide March 9. Train czar Don
Cornelius says Murphy will receive the Heritage Award; En Vogue will get the
Sammy Davis Jr. award as Entertainers of the Year.

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC, color,20th Century Fox (Cartoon)

CUTLINE: MAGGIE: First words via Liz Taylor


                             1339 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1992 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                    December 4, 1992, Friday, Final Edition

SECTION: FIRST SECTION; PAGE A1

LENGTH: 738 words

HEADLINE: Gene Therapy to Be Tested In Cystic Fibrosis Patients;
Virus to Be Used to Correct Lung-Cell Defects

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Robin Herman, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   A National Institutes of Health advisory committee yesterday approved for the
first time human gene-therapy experiments to treat cystic fibrosis (CF), the
most common lethal hereditary disease in the United States.

   The approval signaled a new era for the revolutionary technique, which until
now has been applied only against rare diseases and for patients already in the
terminal stages of skin cancer.

   Researchers propose to replace the defective CF genes with normal genes in
lung cells using a novel delivery system: Patients would receive a nasal
application of a common cold virus, into which normal CF genes had been
inserted. If the procedure works, the virus will invade lung tissue, spreading
the new genetic material and displacing lung cells carrying the defective gene.

   Ronald G. Crystal of the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute urged
families of CF patients not to raise their expectations too high. "There is a
small chance that this will significantly benefit the patients who will be
treated," he said. "However, we're only giving the treatment once. We don't know
how long it will last.

   "There is a great deal of testing that has to be done to evaluate the safety
and efficacy of the therapy. I cannot guarantee that this is going to be the
cure for the disease. But what I can guarantee is that the NIH, as well as
investigators throughout the world, are working very hard to try to cure this
fatal disease."

   There are about 30,000 cystic fibrosis patients in the United States, where
the disease affects one of every 2,000 births to Caucasians -- the group most
affected. Average life expectancy for CF patients is 29 years. The abnormal
gene, inherited from both parents, impairs the ability of the body to absorb
nutrients and also causes the lungs to produce thick, sticky mucus that impairs
breathing. Patients usually die from respiratory failure after repeated
infections and pneumonia. Current treatment only staves off symptoms.

   The two gene therapy experiments approved yesterday by the NIH's Recombinant
DNA Advisory Committee were presented by Crystal and by James M. Wilson of the
University of Michigan. Today the committee is scheduled to review a third
experiment proposed by the University of Iowa's Michael J. Welsh. The three
experiments must get final approval from NIH director Bernadine P. Healy and the
Food and Drug Administration.

   "We're very excited -- it's an opportunity to provide a truly genetic cure of
a genetic disease," said Robert J. Beall of the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation,
which has helped finance all three studies. "We're also realistic, knowing this
is the first, but very early, stage."

   Since the discovery of the cystic fibrosis gene in 1989, researchers have
learned much about the mechanics of how it causes lung disease. The proposed
gene therapy technique would not change a patient's basic genetic makeup, but
would bring normal genes only to the malfunctioning cells lining the airways and
prevent the infections that are the primary cause of death. The gene-transfer
technique has already been shown to work in laboratory rats.

   Researchers will use an adenovirus, which causes the common cold and
preferentially infects cells lining the airways, to ferry in the normal CF gene.
In this initial experiment, a live cold virus that has been modified so it
should not replicate will be applied to the patients' nasal membranes. Previous
gene therapy experiments used retroviruses as the vehicle to deliver new genes
into cells, usually performing the transfer in laboratory dishes, not in the
body itself.

   The initial stage of the studies would involve about 25 adult patients who
will receive the treatment for free. The first stage should indicate whether the
modified adenovirus is safe, if the single-dose therapy has an effect and how
long that effect lasts before another infusion would be needed. It is also not
known if patients will develop an immunity to the adenovirus, which would ruin
the therapy. Although researchers believe the patients could not infect others
with the modified cold virus, they will be isolated until that can be proven,
said Crystal.

   Last Wednesday, the biotechnology company Genentech announced success in late
stage clinical trials of a new aerosol drug called rhDNase (for recombinant
human deoxyribonuclease) that helps break up thick mucus in the lung and
increases patients' pulmonary functioning.


                             1340 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1992 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    December 3, 1992, Thursday, City Edition

SECTION: NATIONAL/FOREIGN; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 724 words

HEADLINE: Vitamin D, calcium held to aid elderly;
Medical Notebook / RICHARD SALTUS

BYLINE: By Richard Saltus, Globe Staff

BODY:

    French researchers have demonstrated for the first time that dietary
supplements of Vitamin D and calcium can reduce hip fractures and other broken
bones in elderly people, even when they begin taking them late in life.

   In previous studies, scientists had shown that the supplements could prevent
the loss of bone density with aging. The report in today's New England Journal
of Medicine observed two groups of patients and showed that those who took the
extra Vitamin D and calcium actually had fewer fractures - 43 percent less than
the untreated group.

   "This is an extremely important study," said Dr. Bess Dawson-Hughes, an
endocrinologist and the chief of the calcium and bone metabolism lab at the US
Department of Agriculture's nutrition research center at Tufts University.
Noting that the 1,765 women given the supplements ranged from 69 to 106 years of
age, Dawson-Hughes said it was encouraging that the effects held even in the
very old.

   Because of poor eating habits and little exposure to the sun - especially for
those in institutions - the elderly often are deficient in Vitamin D and
calcium. Dawson-Hughes said that while the recommended daily allowance of
Vitamin D is 400 milligrams, the scientists from the French research institute
INSERM in Lyon provided 800 milligrams per day.

Promise seen in kin to tumor-fighting drug

    Cancer patients everywhere are clamoring for taxol, the potent experimental
drug from the Pacific yew tree, but it's being doled out sparingly because the
tree is scarce. Now comes encouraging news: A European relative of taxol that is
much more abundant also shows promise as a tumor-fighter.

   In this week's Journal of the National Cancer Institute, scientists report
that four of 10 patients with advanced ovarian cancer had some response to
Taxotere, and one of three patients with advanced breast cancer had a shrinkage
of her cancer that lasted two months. Toxic side effects forced investigators to
discontinue the drug in some patients, but they believe new schedules for
administering the potent drug may partially overcome the toxicity. Moreover,
there are hints from animal experiments that Taxotere may be more effective than
taxol at doses that produce equivalent side effects.

   Taxotere, extracted from the European yew tree, is a proprietary name used by
the manufacturer, Rhone-Poulenc Rorer. Taxol, with a capital "T," is the new
trade name for the drug from the Pacific yew, manufactured by Bristol-Myers
Squibb and recently approved for sale by the US Food and Drug Administration.
Taxol's new generic name is paclitaxel.

Delusions of quitting for young smokers

    To an alarming degree, teenagers are deluded about their ability to quit
smoking after taking it up experimentally, a new federal survey says. The
majority of teen-age smokers expect to give up smoking within a year, but
three-quarters of those who try to quit fail to do so, said the survey, released
yesterday by Dr. Louis W. Sullivan, secretary of Health and Human Services.

   "Teen-agers greatly underestimate the addictiveness of tobacco and greatly
overestimate their ability to control it," Sullivan said. The survey by
researchers from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention found that 3.7
million US teen-agers - 16 percent - currently smoke, and 29 percent have
experimented with cigarettes.

   Those most likely to smoke are teen-agers whose family and friends are
smokers; white teen-agers; and those who are bored, not doing well in school and
have a tendency to get into fights, the study found.

Researchers cite way to get genes to lungs

    California researchers have, for the first time, used an aerosol of
invisible fat globules to deliver genes to the lung cells of mice, a technique
that could be valuable in gene therapy of cystic fibrosis and other ailments.
It's a major step in the search for ways to get genes into cells lining the
lungs, to correct genetic disorders like CF or treat respiratory ailments,
without the genes spreading to other organs.

   "The striking results indicate that this gene-delivery technique could have
applications not only for cystic fibrosis but also for emphysema, asthma, lung
cancer, influenza and the common cold," said Dr. Robert J. Debs, a cancer
researcher at the University of California in San Francisco.

LOAD-DATE: December 4, 1992


                             1341 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1992 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                   December 3, 1992, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: MONEY; Pg. 3B

LENGTH: 605 words

HEADLINE: Dow drops 8.11 on minor profit taking

BYLINE: Eric D. Randall

BODY:

    Stocks dipped Wednesday for the second day in a row.

   The Dow Jones industrial average fell 8.11 points to 3286.25. Broader indexes
also fell, but the Russell 2000 small -stock index set a record (Cover Story,
1B). Losers outnumbered winners 947 to 859 on the New York Stock Exchange, where
volume was heavy at 247 million shares.

   Behind the market: Investors continued to sell stocks that rose last month.
''The market has been so good that I think we're in for a little bit of profit
taking,'' says Ron Doran, trader at C.L. King in Albany, N.Y.

   Investors are looking to Friday, when the Labor Department reports November's
unemployment rate. ''The jobs number is the single most important economic
statistic being looked at,'' says Gerald Simmons, trader at Interstate/Johnson
Lane in Atlanta. Economists attribute much of companies' improved finances to
cost cutting, including layoffs. True progress would be for businesses to expand
enough to hire displaced workers, lowering the unemployment rate.

   Frederick Sturm, economist at Fuji Securities in Chicago, expects the report
to show the unemployment rate fell to 7.3% last month from 7.4% in October,
partly because of fewer people actively seeking work. ''We expect a rise of
58,000 jobs, which is small potatoes,'' Sturm says. ''In real honest-
to-goodness business-cycle expansion, you'd expect monthly increases of four or
five times that.''

   Market highlights: Caterpillar fell 2 3/8 to $ 54 1/4 after saying it expects
a modest loss the fourth quarter due to weak sales in Europe and bigger losses
in Brazil. Among other economically sensitive stocks, Georgia- Pacific dropped 1
1/4 to $ 59 3/8 and Reynolds Metals fell 1 1/2 to $ 54 1/8.

   - Harsco gained 2 1/8 to $ 37 5/8 on news that FMC Corp.  has agreed to merge
its Defense Systems Group with Harsco's BMY-Combat Systems division. FMC would
hold 60% and Harsco 40%. FMC dipped 7/8 to $ 49 3/8.

   - Boeing fell 1 to $ 34. Newly appointed President Phil Condit told analysts
at a closed -door meeting that lack of buyers may force Boeing to cut production
of the 747, its most profitable jet. It now makes five 747s a month. Boeing
probably won't produce its 750-seat 787 super jumbo jet until the end of the
century, Reuters says.

   - Capital Holding gained 2 3/8 to $ 69 5/8. Salomon upgraded the insurer to
buy from hold. Analyst Margaret Alexandre says Capital has already taken charges
related to accounting -rule changes, but most other insurers have not. Capital's
stock price is 9.6 times Salomon's estimate of 1993 earnings per share but could
rise to 11 times earnings, she says.

   - L.A. Gear plunged 1 5/8 to $ 10 1/4. The athletic- shoe maker says it will
lose $ 1.27 to $ 1.44 a share the fourth quarter because of restructuring
charges and litigation costs.

   - Neutrogena gained 2 3/8 to $ 26 3/8. The toiletries maker earned 28 cents a
share the fourth quarter, up 56% from a year ago.

   - Western Publishing gained 2 5/8 to $ 20 7/8. The publisher of children's
books earned 61 cents a share the third quarter, up 5% from a year ago.

   - Immune Response gained 7/8 to $ 20 1/4. The biotech company was awarded a
U.S. patent on gene -therapy technology that covers methods of delivering DNA to
the liver.

   - B.F. Goodrich gained 1 5/8 to $ 47 1/4. Morgan Stanley upgraded the
tire maker to buy from hold.

   - Value Merchants plummeted 2 1/8 to $ 10 5/8. The retailer lost 48 cents a
share the third quarter, vs. earnings of 22 cents a share a year ago.

   - Arkansas Best fell 1 to $ 16. Dean Witter downgraded the trucker and tire
recapper to neutral from buy.

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC, b/w, Source: Reuters (Line graph)


                             1342 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1992 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                    DECEMBER 1, 1992, TUESDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A6

LENGTH: 878 words

HEADLINE: Progress on Spray to Fight Cystic Fibrosis
 UCSF scientists put genes into mice lungs with an aer

BYLINE: Charles Petit, Chronicle Science Writer

BODY:

    In a major step toward treating the lung disease cystic fibrosis, San
Francisco scientists say they put genes that could stem the disease into mice by
having them breathe an aerosol containing DNA mixed in tiny fat droplets.

   After practicing for the past year moving into mouse lungs foreign genes that
have no biological effect, the San Francisco group in the past two months put in
copies of the human gene that, when defective, causes cystic fibrosis.

   At least 70 percent of the cells lining the lungs of the mice incorporated
the new gene and began using it to make proteins in amounts that, if matched
someday in people, should drastically reduce or eliminate the main symptoms of
the disease, said the lead researcher, Dr. Robert Debs of the University of
California at San Francisco.

   Debs cautioned that gene therapy for people with the disease is several years
away. However, optimism in the field is high.

   ''The results absolutely astound me,'' he said. ''They could not have been
better.''

   LONGER LIFE SPANS

   The results give hope to people with the often-lethal disease, and to parents
of children who are fighting its symptoms. Doctors believe that vastly more
effective treatments down the road may greatly improve chances for longer life
spans.

   Some 30,000 to 40,000 Americans have cystic fibrosis. Their average age at
death is 26. Death nearly always comes from lung infections and related
complications.

   The disease occurs in people who inherit from both parents a defect in the
gene that encodes the blueprint for a protein critical to moving salts in and
out of cell membranes. The result in the lung is a drying-out and thickening of
normal mucus.

   The resulting sticky secretions not only impair breathing but often harbor
bacterial infections that gradually destroy lung tissue. Similar secretions in
the pancreas reduce its production of digestive enzymes. The disease also often
interferes with perspiration. Breathing problems, however, are usually the cause
of death.

   Debs and co-authors Roscoe Stribling, Elisa Brunette and Dr. Karin Gaensler
of UCSF, plus veterinarian Dr. Denny Liggett of the University of Washington,
are publishing results of some of their work today in the journal Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences.

   'MARKER' GENES DELIVERED

   Their formal report describes delivery to mice of a ''marker'' gene that has
no direct bearing on cystic fibrosis. In a telephone interview, Debs described
more recent success at moving millions of copies of the human gene involved in
cystic fibrosis into dozens of mice, where it functioned properly for at least
60 days.

   Several groups around the country are working on somewhat similar gene
therapy methods that would use a carefully engineered virus to insert corrected
cystic fibrosis genes into cells.

   ''There is a tremendous amount of excitement right now. The work is moving so
quickly,'' said Dr. Michael Welsh at the University of Iowa.

   Welsh leads a team that is using a virus, called an adenovirus, to infect
animal lung cells with corrected cystic fibrosis genes. Other teams working on
such virus methods are at the federally operated National Institutes of Health
near Washington, the University of Michigan and the University of Tennessee.

   The use of a virus to ''transfect'' the cells is further along the regulatory
path than the system developed by Debs, which uses a mist- like aerosol of
''liposomes,'' or tiny droplets of a fat-like material, to transfer the snippets
of cloned genes.

   TESTS ON HUMANS

   Tests of the virus method on people may begin in one to two years. But some
scientists believe that the virus may cause other side effects and also may not
reach all the cells as effectively as the liposome aerosol.

   The liposomes are chemically similar to the layers of lipids in the outer
membranes of cells. They quickly dissolve in the membranes and deliver their
cargoes of genes to the cell interiors, where the genes begin functioning like
the cells' own genes.

   Plans are now under way at UCSF for more animal tests, in a strain of
laboratory mice recently developed at the University of North Carolina by Dr.
Richard Boucher and geneticist John N. Snouwaert. The mice are the first
''animal model'' for the human disease, and have an essentially identical error
in the corresponding mouse version of the human gene.

   The past five years have seen steady success toward understanding a disease
that had been among the most baffling and frustrating in medicine.

   In 1987, scientists at St. Mary's Hospital in London reported that they had
located the cystic fibrosis gene on the seventh of 23 pairs of gene-carrying
chromosomes in people. Two years later, teams led by Dr.  Francis Collins of the
University of Michigan at Ann Arbor and by Dr.  Lap-Chee Tsui of the Hospital of
Sick Children in Toronto said they also had found the gene.

   In 1990, Welsh at the University of Iowa and another team at Tufts University
and Genzyme Corp. reported that colonies of lung cells grown in the laboratory,
and containing the defective gene, had been ''cured'' by being given copies of
the corrected gene -- by infecting them with modified viruses. And the mice with
the equivalent genetic defect were developed in the past year.



                             1343 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1992 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    November 29, 1992, Sunday, City Edition

SECTION: NATIONAL/FOREIGN; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1274 words

HEADLINE: Despite advances, cancer still claims 1 in 5 Americans

BYLINE: By Judy Foreman, Globe Staff

BODY:

    The report that former US Sen. Paul Tsongas has had a relapse of the cancer
he seemed to have beaten, could, if true, be a metaphor for the kind of
two-steps-forward, one-step-backward battle doctors have been waging against
cancer for the last half-century.

   In that time, the list of cancers now considered curable has grown
impressively. Yet for other cancers, death rates remain discouragingly unmoved.
For still other cancers, such as lung cancer, death rates are rising
dramatically, mainly due to smoking.

   The war against cancer, which is still the nation's No. 2 killer, after heart
disease, seems to be being both won and lost. On this day, for instance, an
estimated 1,400 Americans will die of cancer, as 1 in every 5 Americans now
does. Since 1930, the cancer death rate has gone up from 143 to 170 in every
100,000 people. Researchers know that a large part of the overall increase comes
from cigarette smoking; the influence of other factors, such as the environment,
is much less clear.

   In the last 20 years alone, the number of new cases of cancer has grown 16
percent and the death rate 6 percent, Dr. Samuel Broder, head of the National
Cancer Institute, said in a telephone interview last week. Sometimes, as in the
rise of multiple myeloma, a bone marrow cancer, doctors do not understand why.

   Yet 8 million Americans are alive today despite a history of cancer, about
half of whom are considered cured because they have lived five years or more
after cancer treatment with no symptoms of recurrence. Indeed, 4 of every 10
people who get cancer this year will be alive five years from now, up from 1 in
5 in the 1930s, according to American Cancer Society figures.

   Part of the reason cancer presents a mixed picture is that it is not a
monolithic entity but as many as 50 diseases characterized by some common
biological mechanisms, such as unregulated cell division.

   Much of the gloomy side of the cancer picture could be turned around, Broder
and others say, if Americans took prevention more seriously.

   About 30 to 40 percent of current deaths could be eliminated with more
vigorous antismoking programs, more widespread use of mammography and some
common-sense changes such as increasing exercise and eating better diets,
chiefly less fat and more fresh fruits and vegetables, Broder said.

   Still, even without these much-needed behavior changes, scientists have made
great progress against certain cancers.

   "Some cancers that only a few decades ago had a very poor outlook are often
being cured today," the American Cancer Society says in its most recent
published compendium, Cancer Facts and Figures, 1992.

   Among the cancers now considered curable are acute lymphocytic leukemia in
children, Hodgkin's disease, Burkitt's lymphoma, Ewing's sarcoma, Wilms' tumor,
a muscle cancer called rhabdomyosarcoma, placental cancer, testicular cancer and
osteogenic sarcoma.

   In some cases, the progress has been dramatic, particularly for cancers
affecting white Americans under 65.

   Deaths from testicular cancer, for instance, have dropped 60 percent in the
last 20 years, Broder said, progress that cancer specialists attribute to more
precise diagnostic tests and better combinations of cancer drugs.

   Deaths among younger, white Americans have also dropped 20 percent for
colo-rectal cancer, 25 percent for ovarian cancer, 30 percent for stomach
cancer, 30 percent for bladder cancer, 40 percent for uterine cancer and 40
percent for cervical cancer, Broder added.

   But the picture for blacks and for Americans in general over 65 is not nearly
so rosy.

   Lung cancer deaths for women over 65 have gone up 180 percent in the last 20
years, and deaths from this cause are increasing among older men, too, Broder
noted.

   Among blacks under 65, colo-rectal cancer rates are rising, and the prostate
cancer rate for all black Americans - a 1-in-7 risk over the course of a
lifetime - is now the highest in the world. For black Americans as a whole,
Broder said, there are a number of cancers where the death rate is two to three
times worse than for whites, often because blacks have less access to medical
care and more advanced cancer at the time of diagnosis.

   Given this rather sobering track record, lay people might be surprised at
doctors' often-growing optimism.

   Dr. Kurt J. Isselbacher, director of the Massachusetts General Hospital
Cancer Center, for instance, has spent decades studying and treating cancer, and
is more optimistic today than ever before. "We have the best chance now that
we've ever had to make an impact on cancer," he said, pointing to a number of
advances.

   One such advance, he says, is doctors' improving ability to detect certain
cancers early. At MGH, he has launched a study that, within a few years, could
help women whose mothers or sisters had breast cancer determine whether they,
too, are likely to get the disease.

   The MGH project involves storing the blood of about 400 women who got breast
cancer before age 40, a sign they inherited a tendency to get the disease. The
team will then use genetic tests to detect common patterns of genetic mutations
in cells in the cancer patients' blood.

   With these genetic markers in hand, Isselbacher's team will someday screen
blood from healthy women to see if they have inherited a genetic predisposition
to breast cancer.

   Other specialists point to growing research into genes called oncogenes,
whose activation can trigger cancer, and work on so-called growth factors,
chemical triggers that tell cells to keep dividing and growing. Unregulated cell
division and growth is the hallmark of cancer.

   Researchers are also looking at chemicals called retinoids, chemical cousins
of vitamin A, to block recurrence of certain cancers and at new drugs such as
taxol, obtained from the bark of yew trees, to fight ovarian cancer.

   Bone marrow transplantation, too, as Tsongas himself had, is another growing
area of research that doctors believe will save lives.

   Still other scientists are hopeful about so-called biological response
modifiers, which boost the patient's immune system and stimulate cancer-killing
natural substances such as tumor necrosis factor. Also on the forefront of
research is gene therapy, which involves altering genes from a patient's own
immune cells and reinfusing them to help fight cancer or adding healthy, normal
genes to a patient whose own genes are causing cancer.

   "It's an error to be optimistic beyond the facts," Broder said, "but it's
also not a good idea to overlook areas where there has been progress and where
we should redouble our efforts."

 Five-year survival rates*

   Selected site All stages Local1 Regional2 Distant3 Oral Cavity 51% 75% 41%
18% Colon-Rectum 56 88 57 6 Pancreas 3 7 4 1 Lung 13 41 14 2 Melanoma 81 91 50
14 Breast 77 92 71 18 Cervix 66 88 52 14 Uterus 83 93 70 27 Ovary 39 87 39 19
Prostate 74 88 79 29 Bladder 78 90 45 9 Kidney 53 84 55 8 * Adjusted for normal
life expectancy.  This chart is based on cases diagnosed in 1981-1987 1 Local:
Cancer confined to tumor. 2 Regional: Cancer has spread to neighboring tissue
and/or nearby lymph nodes. 3 Distant: cancer has spread to other organs. SOURCE:
Cancer Statistics Branch, National Cancer Institute

GRAPHIC: CHART

LOAD-DATE: December 2, 1992


                             1344 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1992 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                   NOVEMBER 22, 1992, SUNDAY, SUNDAY EDITION

SECTION: SUNDAY REVIEW; Pg. 28

LENGTH: 326 words

HEADLINE: SCIENCE

BODY:

    From primordial strings of protein to the sex life of ticks, the
astronomer-scientists who wrote the best-selling ''Cosmos'' now examine the
origins of human life, using Charles Darwin's theory of evolution as a lens to
understand everything from the ''missing link'' to the behavior of chimpanzees.

    THE TRANSFORMED CELL

   By Steven A. Rosenberg and John M. Barry

   G.P. Putnam's Sons; 353 pages; $ 24.95

   .

   This immensely accessible science book reads like a medical thriller as
National Cancer Institute biophysicist Rosenberg describes the revolution in
gene therapy that he helped to create in the fight against cancer and other
deadly diseases.

    ACCEPTABLE RISKS

   Jonathan Kwitny

   Poseidon; 466 pages; $ 24

   .

    Life-vs.-profit issues tangle with government policy on experimental drugs
in this real-life medical thriller about two men -- one an intensive care unit
nurse who found himself smuggling life-saving drugs from Tijuana, the other a
San Francisco corporate consultant who co-founded an alternative service
organization for people with HIV -- whose protests changed Federal Drug
Administration restrictions on medicine for terminally ill patients,
particularly those with AIDS.

    ORIGINS RECONSIDERED

   By Richard Leakey and Roger Lewin Doubleday; 512 pages; $ 25

   .

    Fossil hunter Leakey tells the exciting story behind his landmark discovery
of the ''Turkana boy,'' the 1.5-million-year-old skeleton he found in 1984, and
reflects anew on his 1977 best-seller, ''Origins,'' as a means of exploring new
ideas in anthropology, linguistics and molecular biology.

    COMPLEXITY

   By M. Mitchell Waldrop

   Simon & Schuster; 288 pages; $ 22

   .

    If you think Chaos theory is a lot to swallow, take a look at its parent,
Complexity, an ''emerging science,'' says physicist Waldrop, that applies as
much to the interaction of molecules as to stock market drops and the collapse
of communism.


                             1345 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1992 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                          November 21, 1992, Saturday

SECTION: SCIENCE; Section E; Page 1

LENGTH: 848 words

HEADLINE: SCIENCE Some benefit, others risk bias from genetic screening 'Gene
profiles' will help predict many disorders

BYLINE: By Carla Schnurr STAFF WRITERscience; human; tests; technology;
research; disease; families; forecasts

BODY:

   Sarah Goss is bright, active, and always busy keeping up with her older
brother, her mother says. But the 3-year-old North Georgia girl carries a rare,
sometimes fatal, genetic condition that neither of her parents knew they had
passed on to her.

   A blood test that all Georgia babies get when they are born revealed the
condition, and doctors alerted her parents. She was placed on a special diet
that helps regulate her body's metabolism and keeps her healthy.

   "I shudder to think what could have been without that test," said Bridget
Goss, Sarah's mother.

   Last year Theresa Morelli, a young lawyer from Akron, Ohio, was turned down
for health insurance - not because there was anything wrong with her, but
because the insurance company suspected that her father had Huntington's chorea,
a debilitating hereditary disorder.

   "I was infuriated. I've no symptoms of any illness and they wouldn't even
consider a higher premium," she said. "The answer was just flat-out no."

   Sarah Goss and Teresa Morelli represent the benefits and the risks associated
with the nation's 15-year, $ 3 billion science project to map the 50,000 to
100,000 genes that code for human life - an undertaking scientists describe as
comparable to finding and rebuilding from scratch the motor of every Volkswagen
Bug in the Southeast.

   The project, which involves 2,000 researchers at 462 laboratories worldwide,
will take at least 10 more years.

   But within a couple of decades, scientists say, they will be able to screen
for close to 1,000 genetic disorders. Moreover, they'll be able to conduct "gene
profiles" of individuals, predicting almost from the moment of conception
whether someone will be susceptible to heart disease, cancer, diabetes, even
mental illness.

   With the information gleaned from the Human Genome Project, lives like
Sarah's may be saved through new treatments and preventive techniques. Even
previously incurable diseases such as muscular dystrophy might become treatable
with genetic therapies.

   Yet, along with the promise of its medical application, there are many who
feel that intimate knowledge of a person's genetic background may be a
modern-day Pandora's box.

   Among the hidden dangers: invasion of privacy and the potential for a new
class of discrimination based on the genes that make every individual unique.
Already, insurance companies, public health departments - even police agencies -
have collected thousands of blood and tissue samples, extracting information
that can be stored in data banks and retrieved years later for other purposes.

   With so much information on the genetic makeup of individuals becoming
available, the most troublesome question is: Who will have access to it?

   Congress is considering a DNA identification law that would formally restrict
access to data banks and provide standards for the states to follow in DNA
collection and analysis. But many feel that regulations - both at the federal
and state level - are coming too slow.

   "It's the civil rights issue of the next century," said Ms. Morelli, who has
testified before Congress about her case and plans to devote her energies to
helping victims of genetic discrimination. "The law just isn't keeping up with
science."

   A recent study published in the American Journal of Human Genetics documented
more than 50 instances of discrimination involving denial of insurance,
employment and adoption because the genes an individual carried predicted the
possibility of developing an illness.

   "Insurers and employers are too ready to assume the worst case," said Dr.
Paul Billings, a geneticist at California Pacific Medical Center in San
Francisco, who wrote the study. "In their eyes, if you carry a gene it equals
having the disease, and therefore you are dysfunctional, uninsurable and
unemployable."

   But "a person is not just the sum of his genes," Dr. Billings said. "We all
have at least 10 genetic differences from the 'norm.' What we need to realize is
that illness and health are not absolutes; they are socially, culturally,
economically and politically defined."

   Ironically, the drive to find out more about human genetic conditions has
been primarily aimed at saving lives.

   It was genetic technology that provided physicians with the tool that gave
Sarah Goss a normal life by diagnosing her condition.

   The blood test given to all Georgia newborns found high levels of
phenylalanine in her blood, an amino acid contained in most protein- containing
foods, because her body does not make the enzyme necessary to break it down. If
it accumulates, phenylalanine destroys nerve cells that are never replaced, and
those who are affected may become severely mentally retarded or even die. But
because Sarah's condition, known as phenylketonuria (PKU), was discovered early,
she was placed on a special no-protein diet and she is a normal, even advanced,
child for her age.

   In the Goss home in the mountains outside of Jasper, the family measures and
records in a notebook everything Sarah eats. They draw blood from a heel stick
every other week to send in for testing.

LOAD-DATE: November 27, 1992


                             1346 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1992 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                    November 16, 1992, Monday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; PAGE F1

LENGTH: 2356 words

HEADLINE: A Healthy Vision;
Investment Group Injects Millions Into Maryland's Biotech Dream

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Sandra Sugawara, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   If Maryland ever achieves its grand goal of becoming an important center of
biotechnology, it may largely be because of the efforts of six investors working
out of a small suite of offices next to Amtrak's Metropark, N.J., station.

   The men are partners in HealthCare Investment Corp., the largest private
venture capital fund devoted to health care. The group has raised $ 375 million
to create health-care companies, on the hopes that someday many of these
companies will churn out mighty profits for investors.

   To take advantage of the science originating from the National Institutes of
Health and other federal research agencies, HealthCare has located five of the
36 companies it has created in Gaithersburg.

   Two of the companies -- Genetic Therapy Inc. and MedImmune Inc. -- are among
the highest profile and best capitalized of the approximately 100 biotech firms
in Maryland.

   But HealthCare isn't stopping there. It's pushing ahead with plans to create
another Montgomery County company, Plant Genome Sciences Inc., by the end of the
year.

   It has an ambitious goal of creating 10 to 15 Baltimore-based companies in
the next three to five years, using research from Johns Hopkins University.

   HealthCare's vision for Maryland is even grander than the raw numbers might
indicate.

   "Our goal is to make Maryland the leading center for genomic research in the
world by collaborating together the extraordinary genetics program at Johns
Hopkins University with" genomic research programs at HealthCare companies and
the NIH, said Wallace H. Steinberg, chairman of HealthCare. Genomic research
involves newly evolving efforts to decode all the genes that make up animal and
plant life.

   "By the year 2000, all ... drug companies in the world will use genomic data
as their Rosetta stone for the development of new drugs and diagnostic
procedures. No science will be more important to the future of medicine than
genomic research," Steinberg said.

   "One of Maryland's great routes to becoming one of the most important centers
of biotechnology and research in the world is to achieve a leadership position
in the technology of genomic research that will dominate all development of drug
products into the next century," he said.

   HealthCare's Strategy

   HealthCare Investment laid the cornerstone of its grand strategy for Maryland
last summer: It beat out some big-name biotech companies to snatch up J. Craig
Venter, the federal scientist who revolutionized the once slow, costly and
tedious task of identifying genes.

   Before Venter's discovery, only about 2,500 genes had been decoded. At NIH he
was discovering thousands a month. Once construction is completed next month of
Venter's new laboratory at the Gaithersburg-based nonprofit Institute for
Genomic Research, which he established with a $ 70 million grant from
HealthCare, Venter hopes to speed that up to thousands of genes a week.

   That is a potential gold mine for whomever holds the rights to commercialize
these discoveries, since identifying the genes that cause disease and defects is
the first step in designing biotechnology drugs.

   In fact, so powerful is the technology that the announcement last summer that
Venter was leaving NIH to set up the HealthCare-backed institute set off an
uproar in the scientific community over the possibility that patent rights to
much of the human genome -- made up of 50,000 to 100,000 genes -- would be owned
by one small group of private investors.

   HealthCare's deal with Venter -- and its willingness to give Venter an
extraordinary amount of freedom -- shows what sets HealthCare apart from many
other venture capital firms.

   No Strings Attached

   Steinberg first heard that Venter was interested in leaving NIH from Alan
Walton, a Stamford, Conn., venture capitalist whose firm had invested in Genetic
Therapy Inc.

   Walton's company, Oxford Partners, had been financing a gene mapping company
that was going to be put out of business by Venter's technology, which in 18
months had reduced the cost of finding a gene to $ 100 from $ 1 million.

   Walton said he called Steinberg because he thought it was a tremendous
opportunity and "I felt they were the only venture capital firm large enough and
strong enough" to carry off such a deal. The tip from Walton began a flurry of
activity at HealthCare.

   "We always strategically considered genomic data as the basis for how drugs
will be designed after the year 2000 ... and we knew of the work that was
occurring at the NIH under the direction of Dr. Craig Venter. But we were
unaware that this was a program that could move into private industry,"
Steinberg said. "We immediately put together an emergency task force to meet
with Dr. Venter."

   Venter said he received dozens of inquiries from venture capitalists,
investment bankers and others. One major biotech company offered him more than $
100 million. But none of them offered him what he wanted -- a
no-strings-attached grant of millions of dollars and a guarantee that investors
would not guide the direction of the research.

   Most potential investors "thought it was crazy. They were excited about the
science" but wanted at least some control over the direction, Venter said.

   Steinberg, however, was different. He outlined his proposal in a 15-minute
meeting with Venter, who was thrilled with the freedom Steinberg offered and
accepted the HealthCare proposal on the spot. The deal was closed with a
handshake.

   "It's really remarkable. Not a single document was exchanged" that day,
Venter said. "It's every scientist's dream to have a benefactor invest in their
ideas, dreams and capabilities."

   Under the agreement no one from HealthCare is on the nonprofit institute's
board and HealthCare cannot dictate any research plan or schedule.

   Venter's only obligation is to forward any newly discovered genes with
potential medical importance to Human Genome Sciences Inc., a for-profit
Gaithersburg company that HealthCare formed to commercialize Venter's work. The
institute also is only required to wait a short time before publishing its
discoveries, which will put the information into the hands of competitors.

   Steinberg acknowledged that "there is a risk, very significant risk" in this
hands-off approach.

   But that has been the guiding principle of Steinberg and his partners
throughout the seven-year history of HealthCare -- to take big risks in the
strategic areas they think will play a key role in the future of medicine.

   Seeing the Future

   HealthCare was the brainchild of Steinberg and Vice Chairman Harold R.
Werner, who were executives at Johnson & Johnson Co. with responsibility for
strategic planning and merger and acquisition activities.

   By the mid-1980s, both had become convinced that the drug industry was headed
for revolutionary changes and that large pharmaceutical companies were not where
the action was going to be.

   "A strategic forecast I made was that whereas in the 1970s and 1980s, 80 to
90 percent of all health care-relevant discoveries were made in pharmaceutical
companies, in the 1990s and after the year 2000, 75 percent of all relevant
scientific discoveries in health care would be made in academic institutions,
governmental institutions and private or biotechnology companies," Steinberg
said.

   "That's because the science was undergoing revolutionary, not evolutionary,
change and large corporations historically have difficulty responding to
revolution."

   In 1985, Steinberg and Werner left Johnson & Johnson to form the HealthCare
venture. They eschewed the traditional venture capital technique of finding new
investments by reviewing business plans submitted by young cash-hungry
companies.

   A New Approach

   Instead they adopted an approach used at Johnson & Johnson, where strategists
identified new technologies critical to future drug development, sought out the
leading researchers in those fields and matched up those scientists with
seasoned managers.

   "We create companies, we don't seed them, which is a big difference,"
Steinberg said.

   The birth of Genetic Therapy, one of HealthCare's first creations, is an
example of how HealthCare operates.

   Most venture capitalists spend time reviewing technologies under development,
assessing potential markets and then making investment decisions. In contrast,
Steinberg operates more like a futurist, trying to fathom where science and
society are going over the next two decades and then searching for the
technologies that will get us there.

   For instance, several years ago, he concluded that after the year 2000, one
out of every two drugs would work by turning genes on or off. He then spent two
years tracking down the scientist he thought was doing the most ground-breaking
work in gene therapy -- W. French Anderson. HealthCare entered into a joint
research agreement with NIH, where Anderson then worked, which enabled Genetic
Therapy to commercialize Anderson's research discoveries at NIH.

   HealthCare located Genetic Therapy up the road from NIH in Gaithersburg and
in 1987 recruited James Barrett to be the chief executive. Barrett was
previously president of Life Technologies Inc. of Gaithersburg and an executive
at SmithKline Beckman Corp. James H. Cavanaugh, president of HealthCare, became
chairman.

   Genetic Therapy's start-up was funded by about $ 7 million from HealthCare's
first fund, which raised $ 60 million from pension funds, insurance companies
and other groups to create 11 companies. HealthCare already has distributed $ 60
million back to investors in that fund "and hopes to distribute hundreds of
million more," Steinberg said. He said the $ 60 million was raised from a public
offering of stock for one of the 11 companies created by the fund.

   Walton said one of the things that sets HealthCare apart from most other
venture capital firms is "they are willing to put a significant amount of money,
$ 5 million or more, into the early stages of new ventures, before turning to
other venture capital players. Most venture capital companies start with a
syndicate upfront" to spread their risks around. That means HealthCare
partnerships have the potential to profit big from any successes.

   HealthCare has formed four partnerships with investors to raise money to
start companies. Those partnerships have annual returns of 30 percent to 70
percent, meaning the value of the companies created by those funds has increased
by an equivalent percentage each year.

   Venture capitalists are able to recoup their initial investments by selling
stock to the public. But when HealthCare-backed companies have sold stock to the
public, the venture cap firm generally has retained its shares.

   "We plan to hold onto most of our investments until our companies reach a
significant value," which Steinberg defines as about $ 1 billion. The market
value of Genetic Therapy, which lost $ 4.8 million last year and probably is
years away from a commercial product, is about $ 108 million.

   "We're extraordinarily patient," Steinberg said.

   Health-Care Conglomerate

   In the case of Genetic Therapy, the company completed an initial public
offering in July 1991, selling 1.5 million shares at $ 9 a share, and a
secondary offering in January 1992, selling 1.5 million shares at $ 15 per
share. HealthCare did not sell any of its securities in Genetic Therapy and owns
or controls 62 percent of the stock.

   "Our goal is not to own a small piece of a lot of companies, but to own very
large pieces of a few companies," Steinberg said. "We operate as if we are a
health-care conglomerate, not a portfolio manager."

   HealthCare has 36 companies, with each of the six partners responsible for
six of those firms. Cavanaugh is chairman of five of HealthCare's Maryland
companies. Steinberg is chairman of Human Genome.

   This approach gives the biotech companies a far different relationship with
HealthCare then most entrepreneurs have with venture capital investors, said Lew
Shuster, executive vice president of Human Genome.

   Citing his experience with venture capital investors at two other companies
where he worked, Shuster said, "A lot of time at meetings is spent helping them
understand our industry, things like the regulatory environment and product
development cycles. [HealthCare partners] are well versed in all of those
issues. Instead they are able to help us by pointing out things going on at
their other health-care companies."

   Tapping Into NIH

   Despite the advanced medical research being conducted at NIH and Johns
Hopkins, the Washington-Baltimore area still is only fifth in biotech activity,
lagging behind the regions of San Francisco, Boston, New York-New Jersey and San
Diego, according to a recent report by Ernst & Young Inc.

   HealthCare was drawn to the Washington area because of NIH, but Steinberg
said he does not think that NIH has been as big a magnet for biotech investors
as it might be. "I think it hasn't been broadly recognized the extraordinary
nature of the scientific talent that exists at NIH," he said.

   He also noted that Congress only passed the Technology Transfer Act, which
enables companies like his to tap into NIH, in 1986, well after areas such as
Boston were developing into biotech centers.

   Steinberg also theorized that many investors have found it difficult to tap
into NIH's technology because it requires a style of doing business similar to
the HealthCare approach.

   Most venture capital companies are accustomed to dealing with a Harvard or
Stanford scientist who is helping to put together a company. But federal
scientists are restricted from such activities.

   "It takes our approach of actually creating the companies and seeking out the
science to be able to well utilize the talent that's here in Maryland,"
Steinberg said.

   Steinberg's vision is a drug industry dependent on genomic research for all
drug development and Maryland at the center of that genomic research.

   To skeptics who wonder at the scale of his vision, Steinberg responds with
the cockiness of a man who has persuaded investors to put millions of dollars
behind his predictions: "It's going to happen. It's going to happen."endquad


GRAPHIC: ILLUSTRATION, STEINBERG, CHAIRMAN OF HEALTHCARE, MICHAEL HILL FOR TWP;
JAMES A. PARCELL; DANIEL HULSHIZER FOR TWP; ILLUSTRATION


                             1347 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1992 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

              November 15, 1992, Sunday, San Diego County Edition

SECTION: Metro; Part B; Page 1; Column 5; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 810 words

HEADLINE: S.D. SCIENTISTS CLAIM PROGRESS ON HEMOPHILIA;
GENETICS: UC SAN DIEGO, SALK RESEARCHERS SAY THEY HAVE MADE A MAJOR LABORATORY
ADVANCE TOWARD TREATMENT OF THE INHERITED DISEASE.

BYLINE: By GREG JOHNSON, TIMES STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   A San Diego-based research team has implanted modified genes into mice, for
the first time prompting the sustained production of a key clotting substance
that is missing in one form of hemophilia, according to a report in today's
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.

   Other researchers have successfully implanted modified genes into laboratory
animals. But for unknown reasons, the implants stopped producing the desired
substances after short periods of time.

   Researchers at the Salk Institute and UC San Diego are reporting sustained
production of factor IX, the substance that is missing in one kind of
hemophilia. Mice bearing the genetically modified material are continuing to
produce low levels of the clotting factor for as long as 11 months.

   That long-term production of the clotting factor portends "real possibilities
for human applications," said Inder Verma, a professor in the Salk Institute's
Molecular Biology and Virology Laboratory.

   "I think it is an important step for gene therapy," said Yifan Dai, a Salk
researcher. "We have (achieved) long-term expression. . . . Before, it was only
for a very short time."

   The San Diego team's report underscores the rapid pace of advances being made
in the search for a genetic treatment of hemophilia, an inherited disease that
affects 20,000 Americans.

   "I think we are going to see human trials even faster than we thought back in
March," when the National Institutes of Health sponsored an update on research
into a genetic treatment for the disease, said Frederick R. Rickles, chief of
the Division of Hematology and Oncology at the University of Connecticut School
of Medicine.

   Scientists are using genetic engineering to seek an effective treatment for
hemophiliacs who lack the single gene that prompts the liver to produce
blood-clotting factors. Absent the required genetic coding, hemophiliacs are
subject to spontaneous -- and potentially deadly -- internal bleeding.

   Treatment, through natural or synthetic blood clotting agents, is expensive.
The most severe cases require as many as 50 infusions annually at a cost ranging
from $60,000 to $100,000.

   Because hemophiliacs receive blood products culled from donors, they run the
risk of contracting potentially deadly viruses. About half of the nation's
hemophiliacs test positive for HIV because they received tainted blood products
before widespread testing for the AIDS virus.

   "Compared to the promise of gene therapy, current treatments remain
sub-optimal" because of health risks and costs, Rickles said.

   Despite gains, significant barriers remain in their quest for a genetically
engineered treatment for hemophilia.

   The amount of clotting substance produced so far in laboratory mice is far
too low for effective treatment. Production of the clotting factor must be
enhanced "by 5-fold, or maybe 25-fold to be effective," Rickles said.

   And, researchers must tackle the tougher task of genetically engineering a
solution for the absence of factor VIII, which causes the most common form of
hemophilia. Researchers have focused on factor IX because it is a smaller gene
that is easier to insert into cells.

   A genetic treatment for factor VIII and IX hemophilia would address the
medical needs of a large majority of hemophiliacs. To be effective, a genetic
treatment would need only to increase the level of clotting factors in
hemophiliacs, not fully restore production of the missing substance.

   "If you convert someone from less than 1% clotting factor, which defines
severe hemophilia, to 5%, which is mild hemophilia, you have done a tremendous
job," Rickles said. "You have taken someone from severe, spontaneous bleeding to
a point where he . . . requires extra clotting factor only under special
circumstances."

   While the liver normally produces clotting factors, researchers have turned
to other tissues as potential hosts for the genetically engineered packages.
Researchers in San Diego and at the University of Michigan have successfully
inserted modified genes into the muscles of laboratory mice.

   But in previous laboratory experiments, production of factor IX mysteriously
ceased after a short period of time. "It is hard to fool God," Rickles said. "He
made (the body) in such a way that it works right."

   The San Diego team managed prolonged production of factor IX by encapsulating
its genetic code in a complex but safe virus that also incorporates a body
material that normally thrives in mice muscles. That concoction made the insert
"more at home" and, apparently, helped to maintain production of factor IX,
Rickles said.

   Results achieved in San Diego bode well for researchers around the world who
are exploring gene therapy as a potential treatment for thousands of diseases --
including hemophilia, cystic fibrosis, diabetes -- that are caused by a defect
in a single gene.


                             1348 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1992 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            November 15, 1992 Sunday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A-1

LENGTH: 750 words

HEADLINE: Key find in gene therapy at Salk

BYLINE: DAVID GRAHAM, Staff Writer

BODY:

   In a discovery that could make gene therapy a more practical medical
treatment, researchers at the Salk Institute have engineered genes that produce
therapeutic substances for a much longer time than was previously possible. The
scientists added a sort of "biological engine" to a gene that produces a
clotting factor missing in hemophiliacs, and the gene has now been churning out
the Factor IX in mice for 10 months.

   Previously, transplanted genes in lab experiments had stopped functioning
after several days. The sustained production should make gene therapy a simpler,
more efficient and even more effective treatment, medical experts said. The
principle involved in the technique should apply to a range of genes involved in
inherited diseases, including diabetes, growth hormone, emphysema and dwarfism.
"This gives us real hope of doing gene therapy in a practical way," said Inder
Verma, a molecular biologist at the Salk in La Jolla who led the work.

   "That's why all the excitement." The research is being reported today in the
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.

   Other authors on the paper are Mark Roman, of UCSD; and Yifan Dai and Robert
Naviaux, of the Salk. Verma said he believes a collection of genetically altered
muscle cells about the size of a quarter, implanted into arm or thigh muscle
tissue, for example, might provide a missing clotting factor to a hemophiliac
for a year or longer.

   The cells would grow into normal muscle tissue and remain there, and the
clotting factor would be secreted into the bloodstream. Scientists expect that
gene therapy, the transfer of genes into the body to treat disease, will emerge
as a powerful form of medicine.

   Many inherited diseases are caused when a damaged or missing gene cannot
produce a substance the body needs. By transplanting healthy genes that can meet
the needs of a body, scientists hope to correct the cause of a disease and not
simply address the symptoms, as traditional medicine usually does. "One of the
problems with these gene therapies is the duration of expression of the gene
product," said Robert Sobol, a scientist developing gene therapy techniques at
the San Diego Regional Cancer Center. The Salk result is "very significant,"
Sobol said, for helping to correct that deficiency. Verma is now testing the
newly enhanced gene in hemophilic dogs.

   He is collaborating with scientists from the University of North Carolina,
Chapel Hill. "If it can cure these dogs, then we could do human trials," Verma
said. Gene therapy is being used in humans at the National Institutes of Health
(NIH) to replace a substance that is missing in patients who have a rare
deficiency in the immune system.

   Those experiments use different types of cells to carry the gene, and it is
not immediately clear how the new techniques would apply to that work, if at
all. Verma's approach relies on an "enhancer region" of a gene in muscle cells
that tells the gene to make continuously a substance that gives the cells the
energy they require to be muscles. Verma combined this enhancer region with
another enhancer region from a gene taken from a virus.

   These in turn were attached to the gene for factor IX, a clotting factor, and
the combined enhancers signaled the gene to produce continuously.

   It had done so for six months at the time the research was submitted to the
journal for publication, and it has continued now for a total of 10 months,
Verma said. In the future, scientists could add additional enhancer sequences to
produce greater quantities of the substance desired. The techniques should work
for any biological factor that needs to be secreted into the blood, such as
insulin for diabetics. Five percent of all children in hospitals in developed
countries are there because of genetic diseases that could be treated in this
way, Verma said. The technique might also be used to put grafts into the brain
to deliver substances there, such as the chemical dopamine to ease Parkinson's
disease, Verma said.

   Parkinson's is a degenerative disease of later life. In work on the brain, it
would be particularly important to have a long-lasting gene to avoid repeated,
invasive procedures, Sobol said. Duration isn't so critical in some of the other
gene therapies that scientists have been developing, where, for example, the
altered gene serves as a trigger for another body mechanism.

   Researchers at the NIH are treating melanoma, a virulent skin cancer, by
transplanting genes in an effort to boost a natural immune response.

GRAPHIC: 1 PIC; 1 CHART; CAPTIONS: Inder Verma, molecular biologist (A-11)

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                             1349 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1992 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

             November 11, 1992, Wednesday, San Diego County Edition

SECTION: Metro; Part B; Page 1; Column 2; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 441 words

HEADLINE: SHARPENING THE ATTACK ON AIDS VIRUS

BYLINE: By GREG JOHNSON, TIMES STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   A UC San Diego researcher said Tuesday that she has developed a pair of
"molecular scissors" that can cut the AIDS virus into pieces, a development that
doctors might use one day to halt the disease's deadly ability to spread
throughout the body.

   In laboratory tests, the molecular scissors developed by UCSD researcher
Flossie Wong-Staal and researchers at Northern Illinois University have
successfully slowed the fast-spreading virus by limiting its ability to
reproduce.

   The scissors use a naturally occurring enzyme that, when properly positioned,
stops the AIDS virus from reproducing and attacking new cells. Researchers are
sharpening their scissors on blends of related enzymes that are more likely to
stop the spread of the acquired immune deficiency syndrome, Wong-Staal said.

   Halting the spread of the AIDS virus in patients' bodies is an important goal
for researchers because the virus devastates immune systems. When cells that
defend the body against disease are killed off, patients fall victim to several
deadly infections, nervous system disorders and different kinds of cancers.

   Wong-Staal, in a football analogy, said that researchers want to prove that
the scissors can safely and effectively "intercept the (AIDS) virus at any point
as long as it hasn't reached the goal line."

   Wong-Staal, one of the nation's leading AIDS researchers, is optimistic that
the novel scissors will halt AIDS' spread in infected patients. But she
cautioned that "something that works in a tissue culture (in the laboratory)
might not work in humans."

   Human clinical trials to determine safety could begin during 1993, Wong-Staal
said, but the important trials to determine whether the scissors work won't
begin for several years. "A lot of refinement is needed," Wong-Staal said
Tuesday during a Council for the Advancement of Science Writing meeting in La
Jolla. .

   Wong-Staal linked the success of the molecular scissors to the discovery of
an effective delivery system that will speed the enzymes to the proper cells.
Those delivery systems likely will be discovered by researchers who are making
dramatic inroads into the manipulation of genes.

   Human clinical trials for the scissors technology will be developed in large
part by the UCSD School of Medicine's newly formed Program in Gene Therapy. The
program is designed to speed the most advanced research at UCSD laboratories
into human clinical trials.

   The program's staffers would "help to design the right protocols to ensure
that clinical trials are conducted safely and accurately," said Fred Gage, a
program co-director. "Safely and accurately are the key words."


                             1350 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1992 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                          November 11, 1992 Wednesday

SECTION: LIFESTYLE; Pg. C-1

LENGTH: 1319 words

HEADLINE: Researcher stays hot on trail of deadly virus

BYLINE: CHERYL CLARK, Staff Writer

BODY:

   As a Catholic schoolgirl in Hong Kong, Yee Ching Wong preferred the lyricism
of poetry to the tedium of science.

   To her, the verses of Percy Bysshe Shelley rang far truer than the teachings
of her biology teacher. But the nuns steered the young scholar toward science.

   "Science was considered an honor," she said.

   "I couldn't say no." In retrospect, the nuns knew best.

   That young schoolgirl is now Flossie Wong-Staal, 46, a world-renowned AIDS
researcher. In 1985, Wong-Staal was the first to clone HIV, the AIDS virus; and
now, in her lab at UCSD, she is on the trail of an AIDS vaccine. She also is
working on a therapy to stop the virus from reproducing in people who are
infected. Wong-Staal and collaborators at Northern Illinois University have
developed a kind of molecular scissors, called a "hairpin" ribozyme, that
test-tube studies indicate can chop up the genetic instructions the virus uses
to reproduce. When injected into HIV-infected white blood cells in the lab, the
ribozyme led to "a very significant reduction -- perhaps 75 to 90 percent -- of
viral activity," she said yesterday while discussing her work at a New Horizons
in Science briefing sponsored here by the Council for the Advancement of Science
Writing. The ribozyme recognizes portions of the AIDS virus that are shared
among several strains, and Wong-Staal believes it can be useful against "a broad
spectrum" of HIV viral strains. With further tests, Wong-Staal hopes to test the
compound, developed from the potato ringspot virus, to determine its safety in
humans.

   Although difficulties remain in getting enough of it into infected cells, she
and others are looking at various gene therapy approaches. The ribozyme research
is to be published Nov. 15 in the Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences. The diabolical virus, Wong-Staal said, is the most fascinating in
science today.

   "HIV breaks many rules," she explained.

   "And it's really stimulating a lot of interest for virologists and molecular
biologists who originally had no interest in working with AIDS." Path began in
Bethesda Her own path to AIDS research began at the National Cancer Institute
(NCI) in Bethesda, Md., where she spent 17 years, first working on the molecular
structure of two viruses in the family that turned out to include HIV. Many
years earlier in 1965, she left Hong Kong with her parents, emigrating to Los
Angeles.

   Her father renamed her "Flossie," the name of a typhoon, because it sounded
American, she recalled. She enrolled at UCLA, later becoming a research
assistant in bacteriology and marrying a physician, adding Staal to her name.

   She has since divorced. At NCI, she worked closely with Dr. Robert C. Gallo,
the controversial co-discoverer of HIV, the human immunodeficiency virus that
causes AIDS. In the mid-1980s, Wong-Staal and her colleagues identified and
analyzed the genes directing the inner workings of HIV. In Bethesda, Gallo
praised Wong-Staal, crediting her with much of the progress achieved immediately
after the discovery of HIV. We "built the (NCI AIDS) lab together," he said. Her
research papers were "multiple and fast-coming," he added.

   It was her work that determined that the virus had various strains that could
be present even in one individual. "She is key -- before me -- in that data,"
Gallo said. In 1990, Wong-Staal left Bethesda for UCSD, avoiding getting caught
up in allegations that Gallo stole the virus from the French, charges that
provoked a messy congressional investigation. But this was not the reason for
her departure, she said.

   "It was a time when AIDS research was rapidly expanding, and a lot of
institutions were looking for scientists to develop different programs." Fond of
her time at UCSD in 1972 as a postdoctoral fellow, she wanted to return to the
West Coast.

   And, with her AIDS expertise, "I was inundated with offers.

   It was time to move on." As a researcher, Wong-Staal said she complemented
Gallo's tempestuousness. While she lauds him for "so many discoveries in one
lifetime, a very creative man with a lot of wild ideas" -- he was also a
researcher who didn't spend much time on details. Even so, she called the
congressional investigation a "chilling harassment" of scientists who had worked
feverishly to develop a blood test and save lives.

   If details were left out, she said, it was a small sacrifice.

   Had they worked more slowly, "many more people would have died." Researchers
at risk In those early days, she and many of her colleagues, including Gallo,
put themselves at risk working with substances whose danger was unknown. "We
didn't know enough about it to know if you could get infected by working with
it.

   Surprisingly," she said, "no one got infected." Wong-Staal's UCSD lab
receives nearly $750,000 a year from the National Institutes of Health and other
government agencies and receives some small grants from private foundations. Her
challenge is to learn every detail of HIV's journey as it infects human cells,
copies itself, disassembles, then reassembles, spreading out to destroy the
immune system. She and her 15-person lab staff are picking apart the virus,
scrutinizing the nine genes that make it function, particularly two called tat
and rev. "Without either one, you don't make viral particles to assemble a new
virus," she said. She is hoping to find compounds that stop tat and rev,
so-called tat and rev inhibitors. "I fill a niche here because UCSD doesn't have
someone really heavily involved in the molecular biology part of AIDS research,"
she said. Like a chameleon, Wong-Staal said, HIV mutates more rapidly than any
other virus, taking about three months to change its outer coat -- the part of
the virus that triggers immune response. "The problem with this virus is the way
it changes; it's so divergent," she said.

   "You can't expect to have one vaccine for all the strains." Getting in the
loop Her strategy for a vaccine involves a portion of the virus nicknamed the
V-3 loop, a pimplelike projection of amino acids on HIV's outer coat.

   This loop provokes a powerful immune response, and tiny parts of it are
shared among several viral strains. Wong-Staal and United Biomedical
Incorporated of Long Island have developed a vaccine that is a "cocktail" of
compounds with different V-3s. Initial data from studies in small animals
suggests that it may prove to be protective against many strains of HIV. The
next step, she said, is to test it in chimpanzees. In addition to research with
vaccines, Wong-Staal and her collaborators are studying a protein called NFre
that is found in the nucleus of the virus and appears to help it reproduce.
"Hopefully, further work on this product may lead to better understanding of why
some infected people get sick while others remain healthy, and to see if we can
design inhibitors for this protein," she said. NRre NFre doesn't work alone, but
appears to cooperate with the viral gene rev to stimulate viral growth. "We're
beginning to identify these cellular components, but we don't know what they do
normally in the cell," she said. Wong-Staal rarely sits at the lab bench
anymore.

   Instead, her time is spent contemplating new ideas for experiments and
traveling around the world lecturing on HIV, gene regulation, cancer-causing
genes called oncogenes and gene therapy. Wong-Staal is propelled by scientific
curiosity, not the emotional drain of watching people die; she has never met
anyone with AIDS. But she cares deeply about the lives lost in this epidemic.
"If one of my own family members had AIDS, I couldn't work any harder," she
said. The disease is "frightening," she said.

   "I worry especially with my two daughters." The eldest, a student at Barnard
College, wants to be a journalist.

   The other, age 9, is an aspiring molecular biologist. "She has told me that
when she grows up, she wants to become a scientist, and work on AIDS. She told
me, `That is, Mom, if you haven't found a cure yet.' "

GRAPHIC: 1 PIC; CAPTIONS: On AIDS' trail: Researcher Flossie Wong-Staal
contemplates a computerized drawing depicting one of her many strategies against
the AIDS virus.; PHOTOBY: Photo illustration / JERRY RIFE

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                             1351 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1992 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            November 8, 1992 Sunday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-1

LENGTH: 829 words

HEADLINE: Brain-cancer breakthrough envisioned

BYLINE: DAVID GRAHAM, Staff Writer

BODY:

   Gene therapy, a potentially powerful new approach to medicine, soon may be
used to treat brain tumors for the first time. Doctors at a medical conference
in Coronado yesterday described how they might use genes that would attack only
cancer cells, elegantly sparing healthy brain tissues that can be damaged by
conventional treatments. "It's a promising new idea, and it gives us an entirely
new approach to treating brain tumors," said Dr. Michael Blase of the National
Institutes of Health (NIH). Doctors now rely on surgery, chemotherapy and
radiation to eradicate brain cancers. The gene therapy is expected to be tried
in patients at the NIH in the coming weeks, following an approval by the Federal
Drug Administration that is pending, Blase said. UCSD neurosurgeon David Barba
described a similar approach that he hopes to use in patients here as early as
next year.

   It takes advantage of a particular gene's ability to stop cancer cells from
reproducing, and thus from spreading. Sometimes called the medicine of the
future, gene therapy usually refers to treating diseases by giving a person
healthy copies of genes to supply substances their body needs but is lacking
because of damaged or missing genes. Such gene transfers are in limited,
experimental use now at the NIH to supply a substance that is missing in a rare
deficiency of the immune system and to fight melanoma, a virulent skin cancer.
Increasingly, researchers are imagining other ways to cure disease with genes.

   One such twist is the approach to brain malignancies discussed yesterday at
the first International Conference on Gene Therapy of Cancer. If the therapy
proves effective, it could provide dramatic advantages over surgery, which can
leave behind veins of a tumor that are unnoticed. Surgery also can damage
healthy parts of the brain, causing other problem or even death. By contrast,
the gene-therapy approach holds the potential to precisely, and thoroughly,
destroy only tumor cells. The gene is engineered to penetrate only swiftly
proliferating cancer cells.

   Inside the cells, the gene essentially converts a harmless drug, which
doctors inject into the bloodstream, into a toxic substance that kills the tumor
cells. "It's a very clever approach," said Robert Sobol, a researcher at the San
Diego Regional Cancer Center, which is sponsoring the gene therapy conference.
Thus far it has been tried only in mice and rats, said Zvi Ram, an NIH
neurosurgeon involved with the research.

   In most cases, the tumors disappeared, while in the others the tumors shrank,
Ram said. In the lab, the gene that makes an enzyme called thymidine kinase is
placed into a harmless version of a virus, and the virus in turn infects a group
of skin cells from mice.

   The cells are then injected through a hole in the skull into the brain around
the site of the tumor. The virus containing the genes spills out -- but since
the virus can infect only swiftly growing cells, they will enter the cancer
cells but not normal brain cells, which do not divide and grow. About a week
after the injection, the patient would be injected with gancyclovir, a drug that
circulates through the body, including the brain. The therapeutic gene has the
ability to chemically convert the gancyclovir into a toxic substance that
hinders the cancer cell's ability to divide, so the cells die. The technique
sometimes is called a "suicide gene" approach.

   The healthy brain tissue is not penetrated by the gene-transporting virus and
remains unscathed. "We're interested in applying this to many types of tumors,"
Ram said. These include about 10,000 new incidences each year in the United
States of tumors that arise in the brain and tens of thousands more of brain
tumors that spread from other parts of the body, Blase said.

   Brain tumors often are fatal. The NIH studies will first attempt to establish
that the approach is safe, then try to refine the treatment to increase its
effectiveness. Trials in monkeys have shown it is not toxic, Ram said, adding
that there was little evidence that the gene transfers damaged brain tissue or
affected other fast-growing cells in the body, such as normal bone-marrow cells.
It could take years more of refining the treatment before it becomes a standard
therapy, Barba cautioned.

   "Today, you're watching the baby stand," he said, characterizing the
treatment's stage of development. Sobol and Ivor Royston, the San Diego Regional
Cancer Center's scientific director, are pursuing their own approach to gene
therapy to treat other cancers by boosting a natural immune response.

   They expect to seek federal approval for human testing next year. More than
300 scientists, physicians and businessmen from 18 countries attended the
conference, Royston said.

   It is the first of what he says will be an annual meeting to review progress
in the use of gene therapy for cancer. San Diego researchers in both public and
private labs are recognized as playing a prominent role in gene-therapy
research.

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                             1352 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1992 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

               November 6, 1992, Friday, San Diego County Edition

SECTION: Metro; Part B; Page 3; Column 3; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 501 words

HEADLINE: UCSD TO SPEED GENE FINDINGS TO HUMAN TRIALS;
MEDICINE: THE SCHOOL'S GOAL IS TO TRANSFER RESEARCH RESULTS TO THERAPY FOR
PATIENTS MORE SWIFTLY.

BYLINE: By GREG JOHNSON, TIMES STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   UC San Diego's School of Medicine, a leading center for research into human
gene therapy, has created a program designed to speed the transfer of its most
advanced research into human clinical trials.

   "This is where we wanted to be 20 years ago when we began (gene therapy)
research," Medical School Dean John Alksne said Thursday. "We're making rapid
headway in research. . . . What we need to do (now) is transfer the technology
to patients."

   Besides identifying which gene therapy research projects should enter human
trials, the Program in Gene Therapy will develop guidelines covering how those
trials will be conducted.

   And, it will start educating doctors and patients about the new world
promised by researchers who are manipulating genes to uncover treatments for
cancer and other life-threatening diseases.

   "This is a very positive thing," said Terry Gach, a vice president at the La
Jolla Cancer Research Foundation. "The end result is that therapies will be
taken to the bedside much quicker . . . and that's to the advantage of the
patient."

   UCSD's program will include both laboratory researchers and clinical doctors
"so the transfer from (research) bench to bedside can get under way," said Fred
Gage, a program co-director. "When we get these groups together, we can begin
putting pieces together."

   The program will help to create guidelines governing initial human clinical
testing of gene therapies that might one day result in effective treatment of
cancer, Alzheimer's, Parkinson's and other diseases.

   Trials will "move forward cautiously and safely," Alksne said. "The health of
our patients is our primary concern."

   The technology-transfer program is an important development for UCSD because,
although its researchers win grants to conduct research, they generally lack the
capital needed to move basic research from the laboratory into clinical trials.

   Because of funding shortfalls, many universities have stuck to basic research
and licensed promising leads to for-profit companies that conduct clinical
trials to determine if therapies are safe and effective.

   UCSD will use university funds, federal grants and private donations to cover
the costs of setting up the program and conducting trials.

   UCSD's strategy "makes sense" because the university's continued involvement
with promising research leads should help to "speed potential treatments into
clinical use," said Michael J. Dunn, an executive at Sibia, a company that is
owned partly by the Salk Institute for Biological Studies. Sibia develops
diagnostic and therapeutic products that rely upon the Salk Institute's
research.

   In the long term, the program also could increase the value of UCSD's
research, Dunn said. "With clinical trials, you're adding value to your
research," Dunn said. "You're convincing (for-profit) companies that there is
something of more value there."

   Gage and co-director Stephen Wasserman will lead the program until a
nationwide search for a director ends, Alksne said.


                             1353 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                 November 6, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section D; Page 9; Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 60 words

HEADLINE: Genetic Therapy reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30

BODY:
                       ** COMPANY REPORTS **
                          Genetic Therapy
Qtr to Sept 30                            1992                 1991

Revenue                                369,496              133,373
Net loss                             2,032,700            1,270,347
Shares outst                         9,252,841            6,769,502
9mo rev                              1,201,436              256,352
Net loss                              5,41,765            3,451,469
Shares outst                         9,095,617            6,075,724




The company is listed on the Nasdaq National Market System.

LOAD-DATE: November 6, 1992


                             1354 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1992 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            November 6, 1992 Friday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-3

LENGTH: 254 words

HEADLINE: UCSD embarks on new gene therapy program

BYLINE: DAVID GRAHAM, Staff Writer

BODY:

   In an effort to advance the nascent field of gene therapy, UCSD is creating a
program intended to hasten the transfer of lab discoveries to patients' bedside.
The medical school will establish new training programs in gene therapy for
students, a scientific committee to review potential treatments, and a speakers
series.

   The effort will be called the Program in Gene Therapy. Gene therapy is a
potentially powerful medical treatment that involves the transplant of genes
into a person to replace missing or damaged genes that have lead to disease.

   The approach addresses the cause of disease, not just the symptoms. At
present, only a few gene therapy experiments on people are being attempted, but
many more are expected in coming years. "Gene therapy holds great promise for
extremely effective treatment of disorders such as cancer, Alzheimer's and
Parkinson's disease, and inherited metabolic diseases," said John Alksne, the
medical school dean. "UCSD has many researchers poised to bring promising
therapies from animal models to humans." Alksne predicted that UCSD could begin
with cancer patients within two years. The school expects to appoint a director
for the new program by next July. Meanwhile, Stephen Wasserman, chairman of the
department of medicine, and Fred Gage, a professor of neurosciences, will serve
as co-directors of the program. UCSD researcher Ted Friedmann was in the
vanguard of those who argued for gene therapy in the 1970s, and he helped
develop techniques for delivering genes into the body.

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                             1355 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                November 5, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section D; Page 10; Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 899 words

HEADLINE: Market Place;
Measuring Value Among Biotechs

BYLINE: By Lawrence M. Fisher

BODY:

   CALL it a correction or call it a crash, but by any name, biotechnology
stocks have taken a beating this year. This means buying opportunities for
investors who believe the group has hit bottom. But picking winners remains
challenging, and traditional valuations like price-to-earnings ratio are still
not relevant for most of the group.

   Viren Mehta, an analyst with Mehta & Isaly Worldwide Pharmaceutical Research,
has developed two new measures to evaluate these companies, which he calls the
research multiple and the price-to-employee ratio. These are a function of a
company's market valuation -- total shares outstanding multiplied by the current
share price -- relative to its research spending and personnel.

    Mehta & Isaly is the only investment firm that concentrates exclusively on
pharmaceutical stocks, a characteristic owing much to the fact that Mr. Mehta
has both a doctorate in pharmacology and an M.B.A.

   "What is essential for success in this industry?" Mr. Mehta said. "In my
opinion, especially when you don't have a historical record to go by, the total
number of staff along with the research budget gives you a common basis to
compare all these companies across the universe."

   Dividing a company's market value by its research and development spending
for the previous four quarters yields some interesting comparisons. For example,
the research multiple at the Amgen Corporation, is 55.2 but only 11.4 at the
Chiron Corporation and just 5.0 at Genetics Institute Inc. With the average
across 100 biotech companies being 26.1, Amgen is trading at a premium, while
the others appear to be underpriced.

   Similarly, dividing market value by the number of research and development
employees shows that the market finds each Amgen researcher to be worth $11.1
million, while his or her counterpart at Chiron is worth just $1.1 million, and
at Genetics Institute a mere $700,000. The biotech industry average: $2 million.
Again, Chiron and Genetics Institute appear underpriced.

   Mr. Mehta believes these numbers give a perspective on each company's future
market share, on the assumption that research now will translate into products
later. Of course, research expenditure is only one measure of a company's
prospects. It must have enough cash on hand, or operating cash flow, to survive
long enough for its drugs to obtain Food and Drug Administration approval and
reach the market. At least 15 biotech companies now generate positive cash flow.

   "We do not want to invest in any company that does not have enough cash to
last at least two years without going back to the market," and selling
additional stock, Mr. Mehta said. To determine the relative viability of a
company by this measure, he multiplies its loss for the last four quarters by
three and subtracts the result from its current cash balance. Companies with
earnings are adjusted upward, but only by the actual amount of income.

   Analysts have typically divided biotech companies into tiers -- first tier,
second tier, and so on -- depending on their distance from having a marketable
product. But that method has proved cumbersome and unreliable.

   Mr. Mehta said he believes it is now more useful to divide the companies by
therapeutic categories, like cardiovascular, inflammation or cancer. Large
diverse companies, like Amgen and Chiron, go into a separate category called
major biotech. Smaller companies with diverse efforts are listed by the effort
most critical to their success.

   Within each category, a company can be evaluated against its peers, using the
research multiple and price-to-employee ratio. Less objective measures, like the
strength of management and the progress of each company's product pipeline, can
also be more effectively gauged within a peer group than across the vast
universe of biotech.

   Investors can also use the therapeutic classes to spread risk. "Because many
of these companies are at an early stage of evolution, sometimes it is better to
buy a technology group rather than a specific company," Mr. Mehta said. Thus an
investor interested in gene therapy might take small positions in each of the
six companies pursuing that technology, rather than a larger stake in, say,
Systemix Inc. or Cellpro Inc. alone.

   The research multiple and price-to-employee ratio quantify research resources
and scientific commitment, two essential ingredients for success, Mr. Mehta
said. "The third ingredient, quality of management, is the most crucial
component that does not lend itself to an easy and uniform method of number
crunching and perhaps justifies an analyst's existence."

   Mehta & Isaly has buy recommendations on Chiron, Immunex, Genzyme, Biogen and
Genetics Institute, in major biotech; Elan and Cygnus Therapeutics, in drug
delivery; Biochem Pharma, Biota Holdings and Immuno, in infections; Cytel, in
inflammation; Vertex Pharmaceuticals and Isis Pharmaceuticals, in drug design;
Ares-Serono and Alteon, in endocrine/metabolism, and Cambridge Neuroscience, in
central nervous system.

   "For a worldwide pharmaceutical investor, we recommend that between 20 and 30
percent of their portfolio be invested in these small cap stocks," Mr. Mehta
said. Their portfolio should be particularly heavy on biotechnology "now that
the correction has occurred."

   "The scientific progress is still amazing," he said. "And what lies ahead
will boggle our minds."


GRAPHIC: Graph tracks percentage change since Dec. 31, 1991 for the Broad market
(S. & P. index of 500 stocks) and Biotechnology stocks (Mehta & Isaly Rising
Stars index of 100 stocks). (Sources: Datastream, Mehta & Isaly)

LOAD-DATE: November 5, 1992


                             1356 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 1992 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                           November 5, 1992 Thursday
                                 FOURTH Edition

SECTION: FORUM; Pg. C13

LENGTH: 774 words

HEADLINE: PATHBREAKING THERAPY LITTLE UNDERSTOOD BY PUBLIC

BYLINE: RICHARD B. JOHNSTON, M.D.

BODY:

   Thursday, November 5, 1992 PATHBREAKING THERAPY LITTLE UNDERSTOOD BY PUBLIC

   This is the fourth time that my patient, 2-year-old Christopher, has  been
hospitalized with a life-threatening infection. His parents, Jan and  Steven,
have watched helplessly as their son suffered from recurrent  pneumonia,
massively enlarged lymph glands and now an abscess around his  liver.

   I feel frustrated because as his pediatrician I can treat Christopher's
acute infection and reduce the likelihood of further infections, but I know
there is no cure for his disease.

   Christopher has a rare, inherited immune deficiency called chronic
granulomatous disease (CGD). In this disorder, the white blood cells that
normally eat and kill invading bacteria and fungi are abnormal. Affected
children develop severe infections and sometimes die.

   When I gave Christopher's diagnosis to his parents, their confusion and
vulnerability were painful to see. What does it mean to have a gene defect  like
this? Would they gain or lose by knowing whether one or both of them  carried
the defective gene? How would this knowledge help their son? What  about their
future children?

   Unfortunately, as a specialist in immune disorders, I have faced these
questions many times from couples like Jan and Steven.

   Recently, however, the answers have changed. The defective genes that cause
CGD and many other inherited birth defects have been identified. Knowing the
specific gene defect allows us to predict possible future problems in the
affected child and what the odds are of having another baby with the same
disorder.

   This new knowledge can be applied not only in diagnosis, but also in
treatment. In 1990, a 4-year-old girl with another rare, fatal inherited  immune
disease called adenosine deaminase deficiency made history as the first person
to receive experimental gene therapy. Since then, a second girl with  the same
disorder has been treated, and the condition of both girls is greatly improved.

   Gene therapy involves inserting copies of a normal gene into specific cells
from the patient's body. Various tricks are used to accomplish this -- for
example, using ``tamed'' viruses to penetrate cells and implant the healthy
gene. The patient can then receive a transfusion of his or her own cells,
complete with healthy copies of the missing or faulty gene.

   As the government's Human Genome Project proceeds to identify all human
genes, it will become possible to develop gene therapy for a growing number of
the approximately 3,000 known genetic disorders.

   However, opponents of gene therapy have tried to block the National
Institutes of Health from conducting experimental trials. These critics charge
that manipulation of human genes is a ``slippery slope'' that will inevitably
lead to highly questionable practices, such as the creation of humans with
extraordinary strength or intelligence, or a predominance of males.

   Our new ability to manipulate genetic material is raising a number of other
ethical and social dilemmas as well: Who will receive gene therapy and who  will
not? How will the uses of gene therapy be regulated? How will the  information
obtained from genetic tests be used?

   This is not the first time the pace of technology has exceeded society's
ability to manage the moral implications of a discovery. This time, however,  it
will primarily be individual people, not governments, who must make the
critical decisions. These decisions should not be made in fear and ignorance.

   A recent poll by the March of Dimes Birth Defects Foundation found that 68
percent of Americans know almost nothing about genetic testing, and 87 percent
know nothing about gene therapy.

   It is crucial that the American public become better educated about this
powerful new science. Public debate is needed, and the teaching of genetics
must be strengthened at every level of the American educational system,
beginning in primary school.

   The potential to help Christopher and children like him is at hand. If  basic
research and clinical trials progress as expected, it will not take more than a
decade or two until we find incredible new cures and treatments for  people with
genetic defects. These advances will present society with complex  social and
ethical issues. The more informed people become about gene therapy, the better
they can speed its potential toward reality.

   Dr. Richard B. Johnston is a member of the Institute of Medicine of the
National Academy of Sciences, senior vice president for programs, medical
director of the March of Dimes Birth Defects Foundation and adjunct professor
of pediatrics at the Yale University School of Medicine.

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 2006


                             1357 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 1992 Boston Herald Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                               The Boston Herald

                            November 2, 1992 Monday

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 50

LENGTH: 239 words

HEADLINE: Boston Herald / 10th Anniversary;
TRENDS 1990

BYLINE: MARJORIE HOWARD

BODY:

   Genetic research led to further discoveries this year, including the first
effort to insert foreign genes into people with cancer. In some cases the
patients went into remission.

   In addition, a 4-year-old girl became the first person to receive human gene
therapy. Suffering from a rare and severe immune deficiency, the youngster was
infused with 1 billion white blood cells outfitted through recombinant DNA
technology with copies of the gene she lacked. In other health news: The gene
that causes osteoarthritis was found. Osteoarthritis is the most common form of
arthritis, affecting 16 million Americans. The antiviral drug acyclovir was
found to shorten the course and severity of chicken pox. Some 3.5 million
Americans get chicken pox each year. Researchers reported that smokers infected
with the HIV virus become ill more quickly than non-smokers. On June 25, the the
Supreme Court ruled that a person whose wishes were clearly known has the right
to refuse life-sustaining treatment. The court ruled in the case of Nancy
Cruzan, 33, who had been unconscious following a car accident in 1983. However
the court also ruled that Cruzan's wishes had not been made clear. Scientists at
Johns Hopkins University grew a type of human brain cell in the laboratory which
allowed for more detailed study of the human brain. For the first time,
lifesaving surgery was performed on a fetus and a healthy boy was born seven
weeks later. - -

LOAD-DATE: March 16, 2007


                             1358 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 1992 Boston Herald Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                               The Boston Herald

                            November 2, 1992 Monday

SECTION: ANV; Pg. 50

LENGTH: 251 words

HEADLINE: ABoston Herald / 10th Anniversary;
TRENDS 1990

BYLINE: MARJORIE HOWAR

BODY:

   Genetic research led to further di discoveries this year, including the first
effort to insert foreign genes into people with cancer. In some cases the
patients went into remission.

   In addition, a 4-year-old girl became the first person to receive human gene
therapy. Suffering from a rare rare and severe immune deficiency, the youngster
was infused with 1 billion white blood cells outfitted through recombinant DNA
technology with copies of the gene she lacked. In other hea health news: The
gene that causes osteoarthritis was foun found. Osteoarthritis is the most
common form of arthritis, affectin affecting 16 million Americans. The antiviral
drug acyclo acyclovir was found to shorten the course and severity of chicken po
pox. Some 3.5 million Americans get chicken pox each year. Researchers reported
that smokers infected with the HIV virus beco become ill more quickly than
non-smokers. On June 25, the the Supreme Court ruled that a person whose wishes
were clearly know known has the right to refuse life-sustaining treatment. The
court ruled in the case of Nancy Cruzan, 33, who had been unconscious foll
following a car accident in 1983. However the court also ruled that Cruzan's
wishes had not been made clear. Scientists at Johns Hopkins University grew a
type of human brain cell in the labo laboratory which allowed for more detailed
study of the human brain. brain. For the first time, lifesaving surgery was
perform performed on a fetus and a healthy boy was born seven weeks later. - -

LOAD-DATE: March 16, 2007


                             1359 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                 November 1, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

NAME: Wallace Steinberg

SECTION: Section 3; Page 7; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1963 words

HEADLINE: Profile/Wallace Steinberg;
Laying Pipe for the Fountain of Youth

BYLINE: By GINA KOLATA

BODY:

   PRESIDENTIAL candidates who are younger than, say, 200 or 250? In the future,
says Wallace Steinberg, we will not even consider them. Far too immature.

   "No one I know is really emotionally mature," Mr. Steinberg said. "I'm
certainly not mature, and I'm 58." It might take him 100 years or so to complete
the maturation process, he said, insisting that the idea of living until the
process is complete is not as bizarre as it sounds.

    Mr. Steinberg truly believes that scientists are close to unlocking the
secret of eternal life. And he truly believes he may be one of the first
recipients of this largess.

   Yes, it sounds a little crazy. But Mr. Steinberg, chairman of the Healthcare
Investment Corporation, the largest venture capital fund devoted to health care,
is absolutely serious. And he is ready to put money on it. He is looking for the
right scientists to start a company devoted solely to turning back the
biological clock.

   Mr. Steinberg envisions a future in which lifespans will be extended and only
the very old and the very wise will be considered mature enough to be our
leaders. In the meantime, he is trying to keep his mind and body young to be
ready for the discoveries to come.

   As Mr. Steinberg acknowledges, he has always had a knack for persuading
people to go along with him even against their better judgment. And he has often
been proven right.

   For example, he said, at Johnson & Johnson -- where he worked for 21 years
before starting Healthcare Investment in 1985 "to see how smart I really was" --
he was permitted to follow his hunch and develop the Reach toothbrush, the first
one specially designed to remove plaque.  "The president, the chairman, the
ex-chairman -- all were against it," he said. But Reach is now "the leading
toothbrush in the world." He modestly credits the company with "giving
management freedom and independence." A true believer still, Mr. Steinberg said
"It's the only toothbrush I allow in my house."

   Mr. Steinberg tells this tale over a salad of steak, corn and tomatoes,
served by a uniformed butler at his mansion in Rumson, N.J. Mr. Steinberg; his
wife, Maria, and a reporter are the only people dining, clustered at one end of
a long table, near the swinging door to the kitchen. When a course is completed,
Mrs. Steinberg rings a small bell.

   It was a typical Friday for Mr. Steinberg, who works only Monday through
Thursday at his office in Metro Park, N.J. It's all part of a master plan.
Taking three days off a week to relax and play tennis on his private court helps
him keep his mind young, he said, by encouraging a different sort of mental
stimulus. He focuses on tennis strategies and dancing through the night with his
wife at local discos.

   Playing tennis with young men, as he is wont to do, helps keep his body
young. And, in the meantime, he thinks of strategies to keep us all youthful.
"I'm a jock who doesn't believe he'll ever grow old," Mr. Steinberg said.

   Clad in shiny green warm-up pants, Mr. Steinberg actually looks more like a
twinkly grandfather than either an athlete or the director of a fund with more
than $350 million to spend on the 36 companies in which it has invested so far.

   HIS surroundings tell a lot about him. His 80-year-old home in an old estate
village nestled between the Navesink River and the Atlantic was built by Thomas
McCarter, the father of a boyhood friend of F. Scott Fitzgerald. "It is alleged
that McCarter was a model for Thomas Buchanan in 'The Great Gatsby' and that
this house was a model for Buchanan's house," Mr. Steinberg said.

   The Steinbergs are taking great pains in restoring the house, buying
magnificent antique furniture and even X-raying the walls to find the original
paint.

   Surrounded by the trappings of the past, however, the Steinbergs lack no
creature comforts. They are building a replica of a 1910 tennis court, complete
with wooden lattices, for example, but they eschewed grass courts of the sort
the McCarters would have played on. Instead, they put in artificial turf over
sand. That way, Mrs. Steinberg said, when it rains, "the sand soaks up the
water" and you can play five minutes after the rain stops.

   No expense is spared, no detail skipped. A tennis pro watches Mr. Steinberg
play doubles with his son and two other young men. There are a StairMaster and
Trotter in the master bedroom.

   Resplendent in his cocoon, Mr. Steinberg does one of the two things he says
he does best -- thinking. (The other, he says, is managing.) "I think with
simple clarity," he declared. A favorite topic: How to defeat aging and death.

   "I have this theory that death is a genetic disease," he said. "There is no
religious, preordained reason to die." And, he added, it should be possible to
stop aging by creating a continuous supply of new body cells and reviving aging
cells.

    SOME cells are genetically programmed to grow old and die at a particular
time. Others, like a minute fraction of cells that make antibodies, are
potentially immortal.

   So, Mr. Steinberg reasons, the information to combat aging and death is
really all there in the genes. And with gene therapy and all the advances coming
from molecular genetics, nothing, he insists, is impossible.

   Mr. Steinberg is also fascinated with human growth hormone, which actually
seems to change body composition. Volunteers injected with the hormone lost flab
and grew muscle, essentially rolling back the clock on their bodies. A
derivative of vitamin A, retinoic acid, rejuvenates aging skin cells, he said.

   The program fits well with Mr. Steinberg's general philosophy of how to run
his business. "Occasionally, when people come to us, they say, 'You're a seed
fund,' " Mr. Steinberg said. "We say, 'No, we're not.' The basis of Healthcare
Investment is to conceive of where medicine is going before anyone else thinks
of it and to have a fund that produces above-average returns by creating whole
new categories of companies." The concept, he added, "is very, very bold and
obviously risky."

   The trick, of course, is to hit on the right ideas. Mr. Steinberg reads
voraciously and, as he says, "optically scans" journals like Science and Nature,
clipping articles that fire his imagination. But, he said, he has often thought
that one good way to get ideas for new companies would be to "bring in a group
of smart kids, who have not been taught what's impossible, and ask them for
suggestions."

   He created Diacrin Inc., which is experimenting with making cells that can be
readily transplanted into patients without the need for drugs that suppress the
immune system. Another company, Medimmune Inc., is making drugs that kill cells
infected with viruses or that are cancerous. And Cytomed uses immune-system
hormones to combat inflammatory and immune-system disorders. Pharmavene Inc. is
making drugs to treat cocaine and other addictions. All these, too, are still in
the experimental stage.

   In forming companies, Mr. Steinberg said he is guided by his belief that
health care and medicine are rapidly changing and that "after the year 2000, the
players will change."

   In addition, Mr. Steinberg looks for products to cut costs. "A lot of people
in the industry are afraid of the impact of the compelling demand to reduce
health care costs, without recognizing it as an extraordinary business
opportunity," he said. He always asks whether a new technology will reduce
costs. "If I don't get the right answer, I get out." And not only is that good
business, Mr. Steinberg said, it is "what's likely to happen, and what morally
and ethically ought to happen."

   For Mr. Steinberg, a company is a success only if it is a roaring success.
"We don't view anything as having paid off until it reaches $1 billion in
sales," he said. So far, Mr. Steinberg said, it is too soon to say which of his
companies will pay off in his terms. The first handful went public just over a
year ago.

   In the meantime, while he waits for the first burbles from the fountain of
youth, Mr. Steinberg plans to keep his own body going with spare parts, if
necessary. One of his companies, Biotransplant Inc., of Charlestown, Mass., is
growing specially bred miniature swine. Their organs, Mr. Steinberg said, will
eventually be accepted by humans without the need for powerful drugs to suppress
the immune system.

   MR. STEINBERG confidently predicts rapid progress in the biotransplant
research, led by Dr. David Sachs, formerly of the National Institutes of Health.

   "This is not something that is going to be 10 or 20 years in the future," Mr.
Steinberg said. "I would say there's a 75 percent probability -- but not 100 --
that sometime in the next 6 to 24 months we'll see the first human studies."

   Although the company is meant to supply parts for people who now receive
human organs, Mr. Steinberg puckishly envisioned using the organs himself.

   He says he has told Dr. Sachs, who is in his mid-50's, "At the age of 70, I
am going to take your hand in mine and you and I will walk into Massachusetts
General Hospital. We will get a room with two beds and we'll both have a
prophylactic heart and kidney transplant."

   Forever young.




   WHAT VENTURE CAPITAL CAN DO

    WALLACE STEINBERG is high on the power of venture capital. His creation of
Biotransplant, he said, illustrates what can be done.

   It all began with some simpleminded discussions at his Healthcare Investment
Corporation. Mr. Steinberg said to his colleagues: "Suppose there is a way of
taking an animal organ and being able to use it in a human without
immunosuppression. Is that possible?" If it was possible, Mr. Steinberg
reasoned, it should represent the future of organ transplants, solving the
perennial problem of the shortage of human organs. He estimates that it would
save 30,000 to 300,000 lives a year and make transplants much less expensive as
well. Even if he charged $50,000 for an animal organ, which he thinks is likely,
Mr. Steinberg still says the organs will save money by alleviating the need for
expensive immunosuppressive drugs and the elaborate network to distribute scarce
human organs.

   Mr. Steinberg began asking scientists who the best person would be to direct
such a seemingly outlandish effort. From them, he got the name of Dr. David
Sachs, a leading researcher at the National Institutes of Health. And the best
medical center to do the clinical work, he learned, was the Massachusetts
General Hospital.

   Next, Mr. Steinberg lured Dr. Sachs away from the N.I.H. by putting together
a faculty position at Harvard Medical School and the Massachusetts General
Hospital and a position as head of the scientific advisory board of the nascent
company.

   Then Mr. Steinberg hired a a chief executive, Dr. Elliot Lebowitz, who was
division manager of New England Nuclear's medical products division and a vice
president for research and development at C.R. Bard Inc. Within six months, Mr.
Steinberg had invested $6 million in Biotransplant and gotten the Sandoz
Corporation, a leader in transplant medicine, to chip in an additional $5
milllion. He had also set up collaborative agreements with Massachusetts General
and Charles River Breeding Laboratories. And he had acquired and renovated an
1860 building to house the company, just 50 yards from Massachusetts General,
and hired top scientists to conduct the clinical research.

   "We formed what to my knowledge is the first company ever created in this
field," Mr. Steinberg said. "We have the most important program in the world.
And it took putting those pieces together to make it happen."

   But would such a research progam have happened anyway, with talented
scientists who happened to get their money from Federal grants?

   "Absolutely not," Mr. Steinberg said. "It was seen as too visionary."


GRAPHIC: Photos: Wallace Steinberg, chairman of Healthcare Investmen; At 58, in
search of maturity. (Photographs by John Sotomayor/The New York Times)

LOAD-DATE: November 1, 1992


                             1360 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1992 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                     October 25, 1992, Sunday, Home Edition

SECTION: Book Review; Page 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1528 words

HEADLINE: CLOSING IN ON A KILLER;
THE TRANSFORMED CELL: UNLOCKING THE MYSTERIES OF CANCER, BY STEVEN A. ROSENBERG,
MD, PH.D., AND JOHN M. BARRY (G.P. PUTNAM'S SONS: $24.95, PAPER; 343 PP.);
WHO SURVIVES CANCER?, BY HOWARD P. GREENWALD (UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA PRESS:
$25; 304 PP.);
THE TYPE C CONNECTION: THE BEHAVIORAL LINKS TO CANCER AND YOUR HEALTH, BY LYDIA
TEMOSHOK, PH.D., AND HENRY DREHER (RANDOM HOUSE: $23; 432 PP.);
CANCER THERAPY: THE INDEPENDENT CONSUMER'S GUIDE, BY RALPH W. MOSS, PH.D.
(EQUINOX PRESS, 331 W. 57TH ST., SUITE 268, N.Y, N.Y., 10019: $19.95; 522 PP.)

BYLINE: By Lois Wingerson, Wingerson, author of Mapping Our Genes: The Genome
Project and the Future of Medicine (New American Library), writes often on
medicine and molecular biology.

BODY:

   Twenty years ago, in a cancer-research lab, I got to know a remarkable mouse.
She had conquered so many massive tumors that we called her "Old Brinksmanship."

   Brinksmanship was an inbred BALB/c house mouse, the star of our experiment in
tumor immunology.

   Our theory was that a prior "insult," an injection of cells from a mouse of a
different strain, would somehow get a BALB/c mouse's immune system hopped up
enough to attack and conquer cancer cells injected a few days later. Often the
strategy worked. Tumors grew more slowly in "insulted" mice than in the
untreated controls, and pre-treated mice usually survived longer.

   Among the survivors, Old Brinkmanship was singular. Time after time, her
tumor injection would grow to a lump the size of a dried prune. It was a
tremendous burden, covering most of her flank. Yet she would always defeat it. I
well remember the professor, stroking her belly afterward in search of the
vanquished lump, shaking his head in wonder. What was it about Brinksmanship? If
we could only know.

   In 1968, Dr. Steven Rosenberg met a human version of Brinksmanship, a man he
calls DeAngelo. While Rosenberg was working in a Massachusetts VA Hospital, he
recalls in "The Transformed Cell," DeAngelo showed up with a gallbladder
problem. Records showed that 12 years earlier a cancer surgeon had admitted
defeat and sent DeAngelo home to die, riddled with tumors. Yet here he was
again, untreated yet cancer-free, wearing an impish, sardonic smile and an "aura
of secret triumph."

   The encounter with DeAngelo triggered in Rosenberg an obsession: to discover
how the human immune system can fight cancer, and thus to find a cure. Today
Steven A. Rosenberg is a name you encounter in nearly every news article about
cancer or gene therapy. Over two decades he has done to humans approximately
what we tried with mice, but much more elegantly. He has found a factor that
stimulates human immune cells, isolated immune cells that kill cancer cells and,
most recently, injected patients with immune cells genetically altered to
provoke an anti-cancer response.

   "The Transformed Cell" is a misnomer. The book is not really about cells, but
about Rosenberg himself. He regards cancer with an intimate and personal
loathing, as a metaphor for the Nazis who killed some of his forebears in
concentration camps. "The way cancer gradually takes over one's body and forces
its victims and their families to watch impotently as it grows and spreads makes
it hateful," he writes. "Cancer murders innocents. It is a holocaust."

   Rosenberg portrays the history of his research on several levels: as a
glimpse into the minds of scientists and doctors (Rosenberg is both), as the
progress of a scientific concept, and as an account of bureaucratic struggles in
medical science. It's fascinating reading, as well-paced as a detective novel,
albeit tender rather than tough.

   Rosenberg and co-author John M. Barry have taken the methods-and-results
structure of a scientific report and fleshed it out with everything an average
reader would like to know: personalities, emotions, irrelevant but interesting
details. It is an achievement many science writers strain toward but can't
attain, because they aren't inside the researcher's head. Describing an
experiment on pigs, Rosenberg recalls the stench and the slippery, bloody mess
-- as well as the embattled antagonism of a junior colleague. He shows us a
tumor, held in the human hand. It has "an unnatural, alien appearance. . . . The
black color is unrelieved, not shiny and reflective, like obsidian, but dull, as
if it absorbs all things into itself."

   A novel would have Rosenberg succeed gloriously in his cancer crusade, or
fail tragically. He has done neither, and he tells us so. In some patients, the
experimental therapy has achieved astounding results; he has cleansed bodies
riddled with tumors that other doctors had given up on. Many other patients have
died, despite the best of hopes and efforts. He portrays them individually and
with evident pain.

   What distinguishes the survivors from the vanquished? This scientist also
stands aside and shakes his head. He can tell us what their immune cells did,
but not why their immune cells did it. In one sense, we have progressed very far
from the professor and Old Brinksmanship. In another, we have not.

   In "Who Survives Cancer?," Howard P. Greenwald addresses the issue head-on.
The book is Greenwald's formal report of a study he carried out among 536 cancer
patients in Seattle -- enough people to allow him to address many issues pivotal
to his central question. Greenwald looked at the social class of his subjects,
their personalities, how their cancers were diagnosed, their treatments. Who
survived? The single most important contributor, he found, was having cancer
discovered before it was even suspected, during an ordinary checkup.

   To avoid cancer, he would advise, establish a relationship with a good
doctor, and behave sensibly otherwise. The final answer to the question he has
posed may seem a trifle too pat, but he reaches it systematically. Along the
way, Greenwald, who is a professor in the School of Public Administration at the
University of Southern California, offers a hard-nosed analysis of factors
thought to affect cancer survival, such as exposure to carcinogens, lifestyle,
methods of treatment and the "will to live."

   Greenwald describes Rosenberg's immune-cell research as he analyzes
experimental therapies and asks whether it is worthwhile becoming a subject in
cancer research. Doing so may help others in the long run, he concludes; it is
highly unlikely to cure the volunteer himself.

   Greenwald decided not to decide whether he was writing for professionals or
the general public. He tends to focus on populations and not individuals, and
finally launches into a discussion of public health policy that is uninteresting
to the average reader. Nonetheless, for anyone who thinks about his own risk of
cancer and how to proceed should the worst happen, "Who Survives Cancer?" is
worthwhile -- if only because it relieves useless paranoia and guilt.

   It's very current to blame cancer patients for their own illness, on the
theory that diseases are manifestations of bad emotions such as anger gone
astray. Greenwald takes special issue with this prejudice, scorning proponents
of the behavior theory for arguing from "collections of anecdotes." He goes at
the theory with a scalpel, examining the major studies to date and saying why
they fail as proof. (Many focus on animals, whose relevance to humans is
suspect, and the human studies are small and give conflicting results.)

   In Greenwald's own study, the only "emotional" factor that correlated well
with survival was lack of fatigue. Nonetheless, his conclusions leave open a
loophole that lets behavior back into the discussion: Cancer survivors, by his
own reckoning, are those who find a good doctor and have the prudence and
courage to get regular checkups.

   What motivates such behavior? Not repression of fears, certainly, or denial
and passivity, which are the "cancer-prone" qualities described by psychologist
Lydia Temoshok in "The Type C Connection." Temoshok, who was formerly on the
UCSF faculty, identified the Type-C personality by interviewing more than 150
melanoma patients. (Interestingly, she focuses on the same cancer group
Rosenberg studied, and some of his end-stage patients do seem to espouse the
same teeth-gritting, stoical nature that she says predisposes people to
melanoma.)

   Temoshok believes the Type-C personality contributes to cancer as the Type-A
character does to heart disease. Type Cs, she says, do not express, or are even
unaware of, anger and other negative emotions, are unassertive and cooperative,
and sacrifice themselves, often to extremes. Nice people, in essence, get
cancer. Temoshok proceeds to tell readers how to stop being too nice and
therefore how to avoid cancer.

   The book, co-authored by science writer Henry Dreher, is chatty, anecdotal
and proselytizing. Details of Temoshok's extensive studies are relegated to an
appendix, and she spends most of her time telling case histories. One wishes
Temoshok would locate Type Cs and otherwise similar non-Type Cs, and then watch
them to see who gets cancer. That would take at least the 20 years Rosenberg has
already spent.

   Both Greenwald and Temoshok allude to new studies showing links between the
mind and the immune system. That research is still largely descriptive, and far
too young to allow us to understand the enigma presented by Brinksmanship or
DeAngelo.

   As the survivors have defied cancer, they also defy being categorized. For
the moment, the nature of their unique survival remains mystical, beyond
science.

   "Cancer Therapy: The Independent Consumer's Guide" by Ralph W. Moss, Ph.D.,
is a compendium of approved and "alternative" cancer treatments from algae to
zinc. The author, well-known for writing about alternative cancer treatments,
dismisses surgery and radiotherapy as "static," and devotes more space to the
anti-cancer actions of Indian spices than to Steven Rosenberg's immunotherapy
trials.

GRAPHIC: Photo, Lab animal being tested


                             1361 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1992 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                    October 19, 1992, Monday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; PAGE F1

LENGTH: 1532 words

HEADLINE: Biotech Firms Forming More Strategic Links;
Young Industry Seeks Support From Mature Corporations

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Sandra Sugawara, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   Suddenly spurned by the Wall Street investors who once adored them, the
nation's small, speculative biotechnology companies are scrambling to get
outside support by forming business alliances with pharmaceutical giants and
other established corporations.

   In a record-breaking flurry of deal making that involves one of the
Washington area's most promising young industries, the biotech firms are seeking
primarily to strengthen their commercial and marketing capabilities. They are
linking up with more mature companies that can help them to get drugs or other
products to customers quickly.

   That marks a strategic shift for the industry, which once looked outside
mainly for financial support. The reason for the change: Biotech companies can
no longer rely on the stock market for capital as they once did. Investors have
been burned by biotech stocks in the past year, and are wary of risking money to
finance costly research on drugs or other biotech products that may take years
to reach the marketplace.

   In another facet of the trend, U.S. biotech companies are reaching out
increasingly to European corporations as allies. That reflects desires on each
side of the Atlantic to establish beachheads across the ocean. It is also partly
the result of economic troubles in Japan, once an important backer of the U.S.
biotech industry.

   "There are more alliances going on now than there have ever have been. It's
the hottest period of deal-making in biotech that has ever been seen," said
Roger Longman, editor of In Vivo, a medical industry publication based in
Norwalk, Conn.

   During the first half of this year, 90 strategic alliances involving biotech
drug companies were signed, up sharply from 58 in the same period of 1991, and
65 in the first half of 1990, according to Windhover Information Inc. The firm
is the publisher of Pharmaceutical Strategic Alliances, a database directory
that tracks alliances within the pharmaceutical and biotech industries.

   In the Washington area, Univax Biologics Inc. of Rockville has been involved
in a rush of deals in the past nine months. Newly formed alliances have given
the company the U.S. marketing rights to four Italian drugs, an intestinal
parasite vaccine produced in cows milk and access to AIDS vaccine technology. In
addition, Farma Biagini SpA, an Italian pharmaceutical company, has purchased $
3.5 million or about 3 percent of Univax's stock.

   Another local company, BioWhittaker Inc. of Walkersville, Md., formed a joint
venture late last year with German pharmaceutical company Boehringer Ingelheim
International GmbH. The German company took a 19.9 percent equity stake in
BioWhittaker, and was given a seat on the board of directors.

   Kenneth B. Lee Jr., national director of life sciences industry services at
the consulting firm Ernst & Young, said the wave of strategic alliances is aimed
at "accelerating commercialization," or enabling companies to get products to
market faster. Biotech firms are so eager to get something on the market that
they are willing to pay money or make concessions to get the rights to market
another company's product. The goal is to obtain a stream of revenue from
customers that will finance ongoing research on the products that the firm hopes
will produce big rewards in the future.

   That issue dominated conversations at a recent conference in California
attended by 140 biotech chief executives, said Joseph Kelly, chairman and chief
executive of Crop Genetics International Corp. of Hanover, Md.

   "The difference these days is, in the past, CEOs were looking for alliances
to validate their technologies [and attract investors]. Now, they are looking to
exchange things with large companies. They are looking for near-term products
and revenues," Kelly said. His own agricultural biotech company has an alliance
with Du Pont Co. and is seeking others.

   The surge in alliance activity was pushed by two key biotech events that
occurred earlier this year -- Wall Street's souring on biotech stocks, and the
spectacular crash of a highflying biotech company that had shunned alliances.

   After raising a record-breaking $ 5 billion in fresh public equity over 18
months in 1991 and the beginning of this year -- significantly more than the $ 3
billion that was raised during all of the 1980s -- biotech companies are finding
that the buying frenzy saturated demand for biotech stocks. The extraordinary
public financing solved many short-term cash problems for companies, but
provided only a portion of the funds that will be needed in an industry where it
costs more than $ 200 million to create a new drug and commercialize it, Ernst &
Young's Lee said.

   The average biotech company loses or "burns" $ 664,000 a month, said Ernst &
Young's annual report on the industry. Thus biotech companies have been forced
to look for alternative means for financing their work.

   Last April's announcement that the Food and Drug Administration had refused
to approve Centocor Inc.'s flagship drug also made both biotech investors and
other biotech executives jittery and illustrated the dangers of the traditional
strategy -- where companies raise money, develop a new product in-house and
spend six to 10 years to bring it to market.

   "Centocor reminded people the choke hold the FDA has on the industry, how
difficult it is to go it alone," Lee said. It also sobered once euphoric biotech
investors, prompting them to demand greater predictability.

   In the face of these two events, companies have been pursuing alliances to
spread their risk around, increase predictability and raise capital. For
example, Immunex Corp., a Seattle biotech firm specializing in cancer drugs, has
swapped marketing rights to a product it has in development for rights to 10
Bristol-Myers Squibb Co. oncology products that it can sell now.

    Likewise the four recent alliances at Univax, which has 112 employees, more
than triple the number of a year ago, are designed to produce products that it
can sell before its own internally developed drugs are ready for market. Univax
raised $ 44 million in an initial public offering in February, enabling it to
shift its energies from fund-raising to accelerated commercialization of
products, which officials hope will make Univax more attractive to investors in
the long run.

   So far, a majority of the alliances have been with North American firms,
editor Longman said. But alliances with foreign companies, particularly European
companies, have been on the rise, said Kenneth D. Noonan, vice president of the
Wilkerson Group, a New York company that advises biotech and pharmaceutical
firms in mergers, acquisitions and strategic partnering.

   "During the 1980s, we were frequently approached by Japanese pharmaceutical
companies looking to establish a beachhead in the U.S. biotechnology market. But
most Japanese money has left, because their economy is in some disarray and
because they have not been satisfied with the type of relationships that
evolved," Noonan said. "Now the most opportunities are with European
partnering."

   With many of the large pharmaceutical companies located in Europe, and with
many U.S. companies looking for ways to break into the European market, such
alliances give U.S. companies partners that have an understanding of European
regulatory hurdles and marketing issues.

   "Foreign guys seem to be more willing to go out on a limb for speculative
projects," said M. James Barrett, president of Genetic Therapy Inc., which has a
strategic alliance with Swiss pharmaceutical company Sandoz Pharma Ltd.  Last
November, Sandoz made a $ 10 million equity investment in the Gaithersburg firm.

   Noonan warned that in the rush to find alliances, some companies are making
critical mistakes, going for the biggest cash payment rather than understanding
other factors that could influence the success of these alliances.

   He noted that large global pharmaceutical companies with sophisticated
worldwide marketing operations often can provide the most assistance to small
biotech firms. But those are probably the pharmaceutical companies that are
likely to drive the hardest bargain. Pharmaceutical companies more desperate for
products are likely to pay a higher price but be able to offer less.

   Noonan also warned against the trend of allowing large pharmaceutical
companies to take a significant equity stake in the companies and, in return,
gain a seat on the board. He said that potential partners are often reluctant to
share information with a company if a competitor is sitting on the board of
directors.

   Barrett said he does not foresee any problems with the presence of a Sandoz
official on Genetic Therapy's board. "Everyone is a big boy. If we have
something that warrants confidentiality, we'll just notify Sandoz" that Genetic
Therapy cannot share the information with their official.

   But Thomas P. Stagnaro, president of Univax, said company officials made a
decision not to allow any of its strategic partners to have seats on the board.

   "The problem is not all of these strategic alliances work out, and if you
ever want to get out of these alliances, it's difficult to get rid of the board
members," he said.?


                             1362 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1992 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     October 18, 1992, Sunday, City Edition

SECTION: ECONOMY; Pg. 84

LENGTH: 357 words

HEADLINE: News in biotechnology;
INSIDE BUSINESS / FAST TRACK

BYLINE: By Ronald Rosenberg, Globe Staff

BODY:

    Three Bay State companies are working with the federal and foreign
governments on mammoth plans to map and sequence the human genome. There are 23
pairs of chromosomes in each person that contain 100,000 genes. By identifying
and locating each gene and their contents, scientists hope to find the cures and
causes for 3,500 genetic defects. The companies are: Transkaryotic Therapies
Inc. of Cambridge, which has developed a "rapid chromosomal walking" technology
that enables scientists looking at a specific gene to find its location, then
identify it and characterize it; Millipore Corp. of Bedford, one of several
companies working on automated DNA sequencers - complex devices that use
computers and sophisticated chemistries to help in mapping parts of the cell
responsible for transmitting hereditary characteristics and for building
proteins; and Collaborative Research Inc. of Waltham, focusing on finding better
genetic marketers and ways of cloning and manipulating very large fragments of
DNA . . .

   The US market for biotech products will approach $ 3.5 billion this year and
climb to $ 15 billion in 2002, a 15 percent annual growth rate, according to
Consulting Resources Corp. of Lexington. Their study, New Directions in
Biotechnology, notes that antisense and gene therapy are the leading new "second
generation" technologies for the development of biotherapeutics. Emerging
technologies are biosensors, which combine biotechnology and microelectronics to
create diagnostic products and transgenics, where new drugs will be produced
using animal models for human disease . . .

   PerSeptive Biosystems Inc. shareholders failed to get some pertinent
information from Noubar B. Afeyan, the company's founder and now chief
executive. He failed to mention a lawsuit filed by former president James E.
Coutre who was fired just days after the company's successful initial public
offering. Coutre claims that the day before the effective date of the IPO
prospectus, he was indirectly informed that Afeyan wanted to be CEO and that he
was terminated without any cause. PerSeptive has yet to respond to Coutre's
suit.

LOAD-DATE: October 21, 1992


                             1363 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                 October 16, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 30; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 482 words

HEADLINE: Why We Need Genetic Privacy

BODY:

   To the Editor:

   Your report on a Harris poll commissioned by the March of Dimes Birth Defects
Foundation raises troubling questions about public perceptions of the right to
genetic privacy and the promise of gene therapy (Science Times, Sept. 29).

    Those questioned in the poll would have shown more enthusiasm for safeguards
governing disclosure of genetic information if confronted with their own genetic
profiles. Most of us harbor "defective" genes of one kind or another, which
predispose us to a host of disorders. More than 4,000 disorders are believed to
have a genetic component. While many are not life-threatening, insurers are
hungry for information that pinpoints high-risk individuals likely to require
expensive medical care.

   As you state, for example, people at risk of Huntington's Disease, a fatal
degenerative brain disorder, face discrimination by insurance companies based
solely on a 50 percent chance of inheriting the disease from a parent.

   For people who choose genetic testing, which can predict onset of
Huntington's Disease at some unspecified point in the future, a positive (bad)
result disclosed to an insurer means certain loss of benefits. The person who
chooses to be tested usually does so to make informed decisions about career,
marriage, family, finances and, yes, insurance coverage.

   If insurance companies and employers are allowed unfettered access to genetic
information, what sane person would choose to be tested? As long as the choice
to take a genetic test remains private and personal, stringent safeguards must
be established and enforced to insure that the information obtained from testing
remains confidential.

   While the age of genetic testing is already upon us, the era of gene therapy
as a remedy for all genetic disorders remains a long way off. The potential of
gene therapy was dramatically illustrated recently in the case of cystic
fibrosis. Yet the relative ease with which the cystic fibrosis gene was found,
manipulated and reinserted into the part of the body where it is expressed is
likely to be the exception rather than the rule.

   Surveying the public for approval of the use of gene therapy fosters the
dangerous misconception that the wholesale cure of genetic diseases using this
technique is just around the corner. We are probably decades from this goal, and
continued public support for Federal financing of genetic research is vital if
we are ever to reach it.

   The most disconcerting aspect of this poll is that serious conclusions were
drawn from a survey in which the majority of respondents, on their own
admission, did not know what they were talking about. One can only hope this
explains why 11 percent of respondents withheld approval of using gene therapy
to cure human diseases.

STEPHEN E. BAJARDI
Excecutive Director, Huntington's
Disease Society of America
New York, Oct. 6, 1992

GRAPHIC: Drawing.

LOAD-DATE: October 16, 1992


                             1364 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1992 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            October 13, 1992 Tuesday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. E-1

LENGTH: 398 words

HEADLINE: Immune Response says it intends to acquire TargeTech

BYLINE: CRAIG D. ROSE, Staff Writer

BODY:

   Immune Response Corp. announced yesterday that it has signed a letter of
intent to acquire a small Connecticut company attempting to develop genetic
treatments for human diseases. Under the agreement, Immune Response will pay $3
million in cash and issue 1.3 million shares to acquire TargeTech Inc. of
Meriden, Conn. Immune Response shares closed yesterday at $13 3/8 , up 50 cents
for the day on the Nasdaq system. The acquisition is subject to approval by the
boards of both companies.

   In the event the acquisition falls through, a spokesman for the local company
said it would make a $3 million investment in TargeTech. Immune Response, which
was co-founded by Dr. Jonas Salk, is seeking to develop a treatment to stimulate
the immune system of patients infected with HIV. The company has said it hopes
to file an application in 1993 for approval to distribute the drug. Immune
Response, with 16 employees, is also seeking to develop treatments for
autoimmune diseases such as arthritis. TargeTech is a three-year-old company
with 16 employees.

   The privately held startup has been funded by venture capital and is seeking
to develop genetically based treatments for hepatitis, cardiovascular diseases
and cancer.

   The company's drug development projects have, so far, been confined to animal
testing. "With the integration of our existing technology and this unique gene
therapy approach, Immune Response is capable of addressing life-threatening
diseases through genetic and immunologic engineering." Henry Nordhoff, chief
executive of the TargeTech, agreed that his company's technology could fit well
with Immune Response's work. "They've got the AIDS immunotherapeutic now, then
in the near term they have the autoimmune disease program and for the longer
term they have gene therapy," said Nordhoff. Brandon Fradd, an analyst at
Montgomery Securities who follows Immune Response, said he's neutral on the
acquisition. "I see the possibilities the acquisition could offer for the
development of tumor or cancer vaccine but on the other hand I haven't seen data
from TargeTech," said Fradd.

   "The acquisition will be some cash drain on Immune Response but their cash
position is large." In its last report, Immune Response said it had about $100
million in cash. Fradd added that the acquisition price appeared to be in the
same range as that paid for such companies in other transactions.

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                             1365 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1992 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                    October 12, 1992, Monday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; PAGE F1

LENGTH: 2049 words

HEADLINE: Nurturing High Tech;
Maryland Makes an Aggressive Effort to Aid Risky Companies

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Sandra Sugawara, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   Freewing Aircraft Corp., a five-year-old College Park company, is developing
an altogether different type of aircraft. The wings would be loosely hinged
rather than rigidly attached to the body. Not many investors are willing to plop
down money for such a radical, unproved concept.

   But the state of Maryland was. To help Freewing get off the ground, the
Maryland government gave the company $ 166,800 to build a prototype of the
airplane.  It provided free use of numerous University of Maryland facilities,
such as its wind tunnel, and an additional $ 250,000 to cover half the cost of
work done by professors and graduate students.

   "If we hadn't had this kind of help, I don't know how we would have made it.
And that's putting it mildly," said Odile Legeay, executive vice president and
co-founder of Freewing.

   High-technology executives often refer to themselves as free-market
entrepreneurs and frequently complain that they face unfair foreign competition
from government-backed technology companies in Asia and Europe.  But Freewing's
experience shows that the United States is far from a laissez-faire environment
for some high-tech companies. In recent years, federal, local and, in
particular, state governments such as Maryland's have been using millions of
dollars to help create technology companies, nurture them and get their products
to market. And a recent report by the nonprofit Carnegie Commission on Science,
Technology and Government suggested that the end of the Cold War will cause the
federal government to channel more defense dollars into high-technology
industrial competitiveness programs.

   To be sure, companies such as Freewing are high-risk places to put taxpayer
money.  There still is no guarantee these companies will grow into thriving
commercial enterprises. Even if they do, it may be years before they create
massive numbers of jobs. There is none of the immediate big-bang impact that
taxpayers can see with other government policies -- such as winning a large
defense contract or bailing out a major corporation or getting a manufacturing
plant to move in.

   Nevertheless, Maryland officials seem to have no qualms about running an
industrial policy that has used taxpayer money to help get high-risk technology
companies up and running.

   "Technology is the future of Maryland's economic base, without question.
Everything we are doing attempts to build on that," said Mark Wasserman,
secretary of Maryland's Department of Economic and Employment Development
(DEED).

   The result: Maryland has spent more than $ 28.6 million on programs to
directly help the state's technology companies over the past five years. Perhaps
more significantly, while other programs, from education to environment to
police, have been targeted for cuts, most programs to help technology companies
escaped the budget ax this year.

   During budget-cut reviews over the past year, Wasserman said he gave top
priority to saving technology-related development programs.

   In fact, one key program, the Challenge grants, was doubled to $ 500,000 for
fiscal year 1993. Likewise, a project to build a state-owned bioprocessing plant
that Maryland companies will be able to use -- at subsidized rates -- to
mass-produce drugs for human tests is proceeding despite its expensive price
tag.  About $ 14.5 million already has been appropriated, and construction is to
begin next spring.

   One project that may suffer a 25 percent cut this year, because of budget
pressures, is the National Information Technology Center of Maryland.  It is
slated to get $ 1 million a year for the next five years. The center is designed
to help companies reduce the cost of testing new telecommunications and
information systems products.

   Many technology companies say they probably would not make it without state
support.

   "If it were not for [the state assistance], we would not be in existence
today," said Barry Burns, president of Burns Laboratories Inc. of Owings Mills.
His three-year-old biotechnology company is developing a blood substitute and an
anti-AIDS drug, using professors at the University of Maryland.

   The research has been partly funded with $ 150,000 from the Maryland
Industrial Partnership program, which funds research performed at the University
of Maryland.

   Martek Corp. of Columbia, Md., has made aggressive use of both state and
federal programs to help start and grow. The seven-year-old biotech company,
whose potential products include an algae-derived product to improve baby
formulas, spent its first three years under the protective wing of the
University of Maryland's incubator system, giving the company free use of the
university's biotech facilities and libraries.

   Professors aided in research projects, with half their $ 100,000 fees picked
up by the state.

   Martek, which now has 50 employees, also was able to supplement $ 9 million
raised from private investors with more than $ 5 million received from 32
federal Small Business Innovation Research grants.

   And when Maryland finishes its bioprocessing plant, the company can stop its
costly and time consuming treks up to Alberta, Canada.


   Treading New Ground

   The technology programs pursued by Maryland and many other states are a
departure from the traditional economic development effort of tax breaks and
zoning changes, a shift from the old state and local emphasis on luring
companies from other states to seeding start-up companies that may someday grow
to be large ones.

   Among the questions that Maryland has had to grapple with are: How much
influence should business people have in deciding how taxpayer money is used?
Should states take an equity stake in businesses they might regulate? And how do
you keep programs from becoming political pork barrels and insulate them from
the vagaries of state legislative battles and changing gubernatorial
administrations?

   Treading this new ground has not been without its growing pains for Maryland.
The state's efforts to help technology companies already have undergone an
overhaul. The Office of Technology Development, set up three years ago to head
the effort, no longer is in charge. The businessman recruited to head the
technology office, Selig Solomon, left last month as a result of the
reorganization.

   Some sources said that part of the impetus behind the reorganization was a
personality conflict between Solomon, an outspoken, aggressive businessman with
a deep impatience and even disdain for government bureaucracies, and Wasserman,
who became Solomon's boss when he was appointed to head DEED about a year ago.

   Solomon declined to comment. Wasserman denied the assertion, saying the
reorganization was prompted by the belief that the technology programs "were too
autonomously operated."

   He decided it made more sense to have the technology programs administered by
someone who was overseeing various business assistance programs "rather than
having a separate, independent, modestly sized group that was not entirely
connected to the rest of what was going on in the department."

   Wasserman put responsibility for running many of the programs under Audrey
Theis, an assistant secretary who runs the Division of Business Resources and
whose background is in education and work force training. He also hired a
technology adviser, Mitch Horowitz, a former executive at the nonprofit
Corporation for Economic Development, which has helped a number of states
develop industrial competitiveness programs.


   Reorganization's Effects

   Several business executives familiar with the state programs said the
reorganization has not derailed or disrupted any of the technology-development
efforts. Strategic consultant and former Fairchild Industries president John F.
Dealy, who helped recruit Solomon, said that Solomon's technology office "got a
lot done," but said he could see how the reorganization would expand the
resources available to technology companies.

   Solomon was an outspoken critic of programs that funneled money to
universities instead of companies. Virginia's Center for Innovative Technology
has taken that approach. It has come under attack from some Northern Virginia
technology executives, who complain that the technology community has not had a
large enough role in shaping the state's technology strategy.

   Instead Solomon felt that states should get seed money into the hands of
young companies, and to do so he created the Challenge grant program, under
which the state has made grants totaling $ 707,000 to 11 companies since 1989.

   Because of Solomon's strong belief that government bureaucrats and
politicians should not be making state investments, he created a board of
executives, headed by Dealy, to review the business plans of applicants and
decide where state money should go. That board was suspended by Dealy last
spring when the reorganization began. But Dealy said he is reviving it at the
request of Theis.

   Theis said that government officials are taking a more active role in the
review process than they did under Solomon, but that the business advisory board
also will play a major role.

   If Freewing flourishes, Maryland's payoff will be more jobs and tax revenue.
But state officials hope to benefit even more from future Challenge grants. They
are working on a plan that will require future recipients to give the state
stock or pay royalties.

   The goal is to establish within seven years a self-sustaining fund so that
the Challenge grant program will not be dependent on annual appropriations from
the legislature and to shelter the program from political pressures.

   Some critics have questioned whether states should be taking equity
investments in companies they might regulate. For instance, if Maryland owned
stock in a biotech company, would it be tempted to interfere with enforcement
actions by state environmental regulators?

   Horowitz said he did not see any problem with the equity arrangement because
DEED would intervene for any Maryland company unfairly treated by state
regulators. He said the department would not intercede in proper enforcement
actions.

   The Challenge grant program, however, is limited, both in the number of
companies it can help and in the size of the grant it can make. It probably can
help only a dozen or so companies a year, and a cap of $ 50,000 for each grant
was set recently.


   State's $ 20 Million Fund

   The state has created a $ 20 million venture capital trust fund to help those
companies that need a far bigger boost. The trust fund was created with a
combination of funds from the state and the pension funds of state and local
employees.

   The trust fund plans to form investment partnerships with a number of venture
capital groups that agree to make substantial investments in Maryland technology
companies. It already has invested $ 6 million in two venture-capital
partnerships and expects to have the remainder of the money committed by the end
of the year, said J.C. Weiss, managing director of the fund.

   One of the professional venture capital groups that Maryland has invested in
is Oxford Bioscience Partners in Stamford, Conn., which hopes to raise $ 50
million.

   Alan Walton, general partner of Oxford Bioscience, said his group has agreed
to make a best effort to invest in Maryland companies, and believes that with
the National Institutes of Health and Johns Hopkins University, Maryland "should
be very fertile grounds for making bioscience investments ... otherwise we would
not have taken funds from the Maryland Venture Trust Fund."

   Oxford already has put money in two Maryland biotech companies, Martek and
Genetic Therapy Inc. of Gaithersburg, and it is interested in a third, Human
Genome Sciences Inc. of Gaithersburg.

   Human Genome was set up last summer to commercialize discoveries by a former
NIH scientist, Craig Venter, who has established a nonprofit group to accelerate
the discovery of genes.

   Lew Shuster, executive vice president of Human Genome, predicted that within
a few years the Maryland trust fund will have helped a couple of very successful
firms get "off and running." But he said he was unaware that Oxford was
interested in Human Genome Sciences.

   "Some companies may benefit from Maryland's venture trust fund program and
not even know they are benefiting," he said.


GRAPHIC: ILLUSTRATION, HIGH-TECH HELP IN MARYLANDTHESE ARE THE MAJOR MARYLAND
PROGRAMS AIMED AT HELPING HIGH-TECH COMPANIES IN THE STATE, AND HOW MUCH IS
SPENT ON THEM: DAVE JONASON FOR TWP; PHOTO, CRAIG HERNDON; PHOTO, JAMES A.
PARCELL; PHOTO, FRED SWEETS; CHART


                             1366 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1992 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                    October 12, 1992, Monday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; PAGE F7

LENGTH: 719 words

HEADLINE: Hughes Network Systems to Help Bring Phone Service to North Canada

SERIES: Occasional

BODY:

   Hughes Network Systems of Germantown will sell a $ 12 million satellite
network to Northwestel of Whitehorse, Canada, to bring telephone service to some
areas of the Canadian north for the first time.

   The network will comprise several dozen remote terminals at locations
throughout the eastern Arctic, Yukon and Northwest Territories. The Arctic
region to be served comprises 22 native Intuit settlements with a population of
57,000.

   Because many of these settlements are located on islands in the Arctic
archipelago, they have not had telephone service before. For inhabitants of
inland settlements, the network will upgrade the mechanical, terrestrial phone
system installed more than 30 years ago. The first nine terminals will be
operating by year's end.

   Marriott Corp. of Bethesda said it has completed the previously announced
sale of 40 Big Boy restaurants to Shoney's Inc. and Thompson Hospitality L.P., a
Shoney's franchisee, for about $ 17.5 million.

   Under the transaction, Thompson Hospitality purchased 31 restaurants and
expects to convert at least 26 units to Shoney's restaurants over the next two
years. Shoney's Inc. acquired nine restaurants. It will convert these to
Shoney's restaurants over the next five months.

   The restaurants are in Maryland, Virginia and the District.

   Genetic Therapy Inc. of Gaithersburg said the Recombinant DNA Advisory
Committee of the National Institutes of Health approved a human gene therapy
trial for the direct in vivo administration into patients of genetically altered
vectors for the treatment of lung cancer.

   C3 Inc. of Herndon said American Security Bank N.A. agreed to extend to Dec.
1 the date for repayment of $ 4 million under the credit facility between the
two companies. The repayment date had been Oct. 1.

   C3 said American Security advanced $ 4 million on July 17 in addition to the
$ 35 million American Security had previously advanced, and which remains
outstanding.

   General Sciences Corp. of Laurel announced that it will begin immediate
delivery of a $ 5.2 million METPRO Meteorological Satellite Information
Processing System to Thailand. The system will be used to upgrade the Thai
Meteorological Department's storm prediction and routine weather forecasting
services, and will begin operating later this year.

   METPRO will collect cloud-cover images and data on atmospheric weather
conditions from a Japanese stationary-orbit satellite, as well as from several
U.S. polar orbiting satellites as they pass over Thailand.

   The information will be integrated automatically with other surface and upper
air weather data from sensors located in Southeast Asia, and with data from
Thailand's radar network.

   Courtyard by Marriott announced the transfer of ownership of the Gaithersburg
Courtyard from Rahn Properties of Fort Lauderdale, Fla., to Ruffin Cos. of
Wichita, Kan. Courtyard by Marriott is a division of Marriott Corp. of Bethesda.

   Du Pont Co. of Wilmington, Del., said it will build a second Lycra spandex
plant in Waynesboro, Va.

   The plant initially will employ about 100 workers but expansion could mean as
many as 200 to 300 more jobs over the next 10 years, said Tom Harris, manager of
Du Pont's Lycra plant. The existing plant, which also produces nylon, has about
1,700 workers.

   Construction will begin in 1994, and the plant is expected to start up in
1995.

   Edward Segal Communications of the District was retained to provide media
relations services to the Southern California Veterans Services Council Inc. of
Inglewood, Calif.

   Hayman Business Systems is moving from the District to Laurel.

   Masterminds Advertising of Severna Park, Md., was retained by E.L. Gardner
Inc. of Annapolis.

   Penn Camera Exchange Inc. of Washington opened a retail store in Tysons
Corner.

   Lukmire Partnership Inc. of Arlington was awarded the design contract for the
renovation and expansion of the Kate Waller Barrett Library in Old Town
Alexandria.

   It also was awarded the design contract for the Spotsylvania Library in
Spotsylvania, Va.

   Homecall Inc. of Frederick, Md., acquired McCulloh Home Health of Baltimore.?

   Announcements of news and developments affecting Washington area companies
should be sent to Regional Report, Business News Department, The Washington
Post, 1150 15th St. NW, Washington, D.C., 20071-5302.


                             1367 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1992 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                     October 9, 1992, Friday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; PAGE F2; DIGEST

LENGTH: 952 words

SERIES: Occasional

BODY:

   Senate last night passed a bill placing new regulations on the Federal
National Mortgage Association and the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp. The
action completes work on the controversial measure, which now goes to President
Bush.

   Crestar Financial's senior debt rating was raised by Moody's Investors
Service to Baa2 from Baa3, and the company's commercial paper rating was raised
to Prime-2 from Prime-3. "The upgrades were based on Crestar's progress in
addressing its commercial real estate problem, as well as on the company's
improved liquidity," Moody's said.

   Mobil launched an aviation refueling joint venture with Emirates General
Petroleum at Dubai International Airport in the United Arab Emirates.

   Westinghouse Electric was ordered by an arbitration panel to pay a $ 2.5
million award to a Brazilian utility in a warranty dispute over a nuclear power
plant. But the International Chamber of Commerce panel dismissed related claims
of fraud, negligence and racketeering, the company said.

   McDonnell Douglas said changes in its health care and pension plans for
nonunion retirees will soften the blow to the company's bottom line when new
accounting rules go into effect. The company said it would replace its
company-funded health care coverage for nonunion retirees with one paid for by
the retirees themselves. Retirees who enroll will receive a one-time pension
supplement of $ 18,000 from the company, which can be used to pay the bills.

   Bell Atlantic Financial Services filed with the SEC for an offering of up to
$ 1.7 billion in debt securities.  Fleet Financial announced a $ 38 million
program to reduce mortgage interest rates and fees in the 23 states where it
operates and said it would suspend all home foreclosures for 60 days. Fleet has
been accused of unfair lending practices in lawsuits in Georgia and other
states, but Fleet officials continued to maintain their innocence and said the
program has nothing to do with the charges.

   Martin Marietta will cut 300 jobs at its information systems division in
Orlando, Fla., by the yearend.

   GM has signed up the 1 millionth customer for its new GM MasterCard less than
a month after launching the card. Separately, GM said poor car sales kept it
from making a long-term commitment to Disney as a sponsor at Epcot Center.

   Hachette, the French media giant that publishes Elle and Woman's Day
magazines, said that rival Havas was snapping up its shares. The announcement
sent Hachette's stock soaring 12 percent on the Paris stock exchange. Havas
denied any interest in buying the shares.

   Genetic Therapy has signed an agreement with W. French Anderson and the
University of Southern California that will allow the Gaithersburg biotech
company to continue its relationship with Anderson, a scientist and leading
researcher. During the past six years, Anderson and Genetic Therapy have
collaborated on a broad range of human gene therapy programs.

   Three communications giants launched a $ 10 million, 18-month test south of
Denver that may determine the future of home movie viewing. Spokesmen for AT&T,
Tele-Communications and US West said to determine what people will watch and how
often, 300 Littleton, Colo., residences are being hooked up to one of two
services: a "movie-on-demand" service called Take One, or an enhanced
pay-per-view service called Hits at Home.

   France's agriculture trade minister, in hard-line remarks that could
jeopardize a global trade agreement, rejected any further European concessions
to Washington and threatened retaliation against the United States.

   Bankruptcy code reforms in a bill passed Tuesday by the Senate may fail to
get final approval from the House. The House is scheduled to adjourn today
without considering any further legislation this year -- effectively ending a
two-year effort to get Congress to make changes to the U.S. Bankruptcy Code.

   A former MiniScribe manager accused of participating in a scheme to ship
bricks disguised as computer parts has settled his case with regulators and
agreed to pay a $ 20,000 penalty. James L. Sager is the eighth MiniScribe
official to reach an SEC agreement.

   TWA's $ 1.2 billion shortfall in pension funds may soon be removed as an
obstacle to the airline's attempt to leave bankruptcy court protection by
selling to its creditors and employees. Under an agreement with the Pension
Benefit Guaranty Corp., TWA would pay part of the shortfall over 15 years.
Meanwhile, the PBGC -- the government agency that guarantees pensions -- would
pursue TWA Chairman Carl Icahn and his other businesses for the entire $ 1.2
billion deficit.

   Unisys won an IRS contract worth up to $ 115 million for computers, software
and other services

   Dow Jones & Co. said its third-quarter earnings rose 31.7 percent because of
improved advertising and circulation revenue from the Wall Street Journal and
better results from its community newspapers.

   Media General reported a third-quarter profit of $ 1.9 million compared with
a $ 78.8 million loss during the same period a year ago, which included special
charges associated with an early retirement program and the consolidation of the
company's two Richmond newspapers.

   Warren Buffett increased his stake in Wells Fargo to 11.8 percent from 10.8
percent.

   The Amex and Comex, in another sign of Wall Street's longer hours and global
focus, will open early to trade a new index of European stocks beginning Oct.
26. The American Stock Exchange will open at 8:30 a.m. Eastern time to trade a
stock-index option based on a basket of 100 top European stocks. The Commodity
Exchange will open at 7:30 a.m. to trade a companion futures contract on the
index of European stocks.


                             1368 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1992 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                     October 5, 1992, Monday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; PAGE F33; WASHINGTON INVESTING

LENGTH: 1857 words

HEADLINE: Local Stocks Working Hard, but Some Hardly Working

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Stan Hinden, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   Treading water. Kicking furiously but going nowhere. That's what stocks were
doing for the first nine months of this year. When the third quarter ended last
week, the market averages wound up pretty close to where they started on Jan. 1.

   The Dow Jones industrial average, home to the 30 bluest of the blue chips,
was up 3.3 percent for the nine months. But the Dow put on a solitary
performance.

   The New York Stock Exchange composite was flat with a minuscule 0.01 percent
gain, the Standard & Poor's 500 was similarly neutral with a 0.17 percent gain,
while the Nasdaq composite showed a tiny 0.52 percent loss. The Wilshire index
of 5,000 stocks turned in a 0.41 percent drop.

   The picture for stocks in the Washington region was mixed. The average price
of 179 stocks listed in the Washington Business stock table fell 7.7 percent,
with most of the losses coming last spring.

   However, there was better news in the Johnston, Lemon index of 30 local blue
chips, which showed a 14 percent gain for the nine months.

   The gain was due, in large measure, to the comeback of bank and thrift
stocks, which were slashed deeply two years ago when real estate loans soured.
Indeed, 12 of the 20 top gainers during the nine months were financial stocks.

   The banks and thrifts have profited greatly from lower interest rates, which
increase the gap between what banks pay depositors and what they charge
borrowers.

   Here are the Washington area stocks, trading at $ 2 or more, that turned in
the best performances during the first nine months. The first number is the Dec.
31, 1991 price and the second number is the Sept. 30, 1992 price.

   First Citizens Financial Corp. of Silver Spring; $ 1 to $ 5, up 400 percent.
Parent of Citizens Savings Bank, the thrift reported a six-month profit of $ 1.2
million, compared with a loss of $ 4.2 million a year earlier.

   CFSFinancial Corp. of Fairfax; $ 3.50 to $ 11, up 214 percent. CFS, parent of
Continental Federal Savings Bank, closed its fiscal year in June with a $ 1.4
million profit, compared with a $ 13.3 million loss in the previous year.

   DataMeasurement Corp. of Gaithersburg; $ 1.25 to $ 3.88, up 210 percent. The
company, which makes computerized industrial measuring machines, has seen an
improvement in its profit margins.

   JupiterNational Corp. of Chevy Chase; $ 7.13 to $ 17.50, up 145 percent.
Formerly Greater Washington Investors Inc., Jupiter has agreed to buy the custom
fabrics division of West Point-Pepperell Inc.

   MNCFinancial Inc. of Baltimore; $ 4.88 to $ 10.88, up 123 percent. MNC is the
parent of Maryland National and American Security Banks. Nationsbank has agreed
to invest $ 200 million in MNC, with an option to buy the bank within five
years.

   Resource Mortgage Capital Inc. of Columbia, Md.; $ 10.50 to $ 22.75, up 117
percent. Formerly called RAC Mortgage Investment Corp., the firm recently became
independent from Ryland Acceptance Corp., a subsidiary of home builder Ryland
Group.

   ColumbiaFirst Bank of Arlington; $ 6.75 to $ 13.63, up 102 percent. The
thrift reported a $ 3.7 million profit for the first nine months of the year,
compared with a $ 1.4 million loss a year earlier.

   Riggs National Corp. of Washington;$ 4.25 to $ 8.25, up 94 percent. Riggs
continues to see small improvements in its profitability and overall financial
health.

   IndependenceFederal Savings Bank of Washington; $ 2.50 to $ 4.75, up 90
percent. A minority-owned thrift, Independence Federal has reported that profit
is climbing steadily.

   UniversalSecurity Instruments Inc. of Owings Mills, Md.; $ 1.63 to $ 3, up 84
percent. Universal makes telephones and smoke detectors. Although Universal
shares have moved up, the company recently reported profit was slipping.

   Dominion Bankshares Corp. of Roanoke; $ 10.75 to $ 19.50, up 81 percent.
First Union Corp. of Charlotte, N.C., plans to buy Dominion in a deal valued at
more than $ 800 million.

   Crestar Financial Corp. of Richmond;$ 17.75 to $ 31.13, up 75 percent.
Troubled loans are declining and profits are up 26 percent in the first half of
the year.

   SignetBanking Corp. of Richmond; $ 23 to $ 39.50, up 72 percent. Signet
reported a six-month profit of $ 49 million, triple the profit of a year
earlier.

   Optelecom Inc. of Gaithersburg; $ 1.69 to $ 2.88, up 70 percent.The company
makes fiber-optic products and laser systems. The company's profit and contract
backlog have been growing.

   Loyola Capital Corp. of Baltimore; $ 14.25 to $ 24, up 68 percent. Loyola,
which escaped the worst of the commercial real estate crisis, reported that its
six-month earnings were up 17 percent.

   Here are the stocks, trading at $ 2 or more, that turned in the poorest
performances during the first nine months. The first number is the Dec. 31, 1991
price and the second number is the Sept. 30, 1992 price.

   CropGenetics International Corp. of Hanover, Md.; $ 11 to $ 4, down 64
percent. The company, which develops bug-fighting plant viruses, lost almost $ 3
million in the first half of the year. The firm lost $ 2.8 million a year
earlier.

   Systems Center Inc. of Reston; $ 15.38 to $ 5.75, down 63 percent. A computer
company, Systems Center has been struggling to keep its independence in a highly
competitive environment.

   MedImmune Inc. of Gaithersburg; $ 43.75 to $ 17.25, down 61 percent. The
company specializes in research on vaccines for AIDS and other infectious
diseases. Reporting a small profit, the firm said sales were down while research
costs were up.

   GovernmentTechnology Services Inc. of Chantilly; $ 13.25 to $ 6, down 55
percent. The company sells computers to federal and state agencies. Its profit
has dropped sharply because of competition and a slowdown in government
spending.

   General Physics Corp. of Columbia, Md.; $ 15.75 to $ 7.13, down 55 percent.
The company provides services to electric utilities and nuclear facilities.
Earnings are down, in part, because of delays in the awarding of new contracts.

   Survival Technology Inc. of Rockville; $ 19.75 to $ 9, down 54 percent. The
firm, which makes medical devices, including chemical warfare antidotes, saw its
sales and stock price soar during the Persian Gulf War. But military sales have
dropped.

   OncorInc. of Gaithersburg; $ 9.38 to $ 4.88, down 48 percent. The company
produces products to diagnose and manage cancer and genetic diseases. While
sales are up, the company continues to spend for research, resulting in
operating losses.

   PHP Healthcare Corp. of Alexandria; $ 17.25 to $ 9.25, down 46 percent. PHP,
which provides health services to the armed forces and other government
agencies, was hurt when contract awards slowed down. However, PHP's business has
picked up.

   InterstateGeneral Co. L.P. of St. Charles, Md.; $ 3.75 to $ 2.19, down 42
percent. A real estate investment and building company, active in Charles
County, Md., and Puerto Rico, Interstate's finances have been hurt by the real
estate recession.

   Radiation Systems, Inc. of Sterling; $ 19 to $ 11.50, down 40 percent. The
shares of this antenna and communications equipment manufacturer rose rapidly in
1991 when military needs in the Persian Gulf created a sales boom. The stock has
since retraced its steps.

   BET Holdings Inc. of Washington; $ 21.88 to $ 13.25, down 39 percent. The
company owns Black Entertainment Television. Revenue has been rising but BET
profit was adversely affected by losses at the company's magazines.

   AES Corp. of Arlington; $ 34.25 to $ 21, down 39 percent. AES stock was hurt
earlier this year by publicity about AES employees falsifying data at an
Oklahoma power plant. Profit is up and the stock has begun to recover.

   Genetic Therapy Inc. of Gaithersburg; $ 15.25 to $ 9.50, down 38 percent. The
firm uses genes to repair human cells -- techniques that are still experimental.
It reported a first-quarter loss of $ 1.8 million after losing $ 1.9 million a
year earlier.

   Fairchild Corp. of Chantilly; $ 6.63 to $ 4.13, down 38 percent. A
manufacturing company, Fairchild has been hurt by the recession and by reduced
defense spending. Its fiscal year ended in June with a $ 22.8 million loss.

   Microdyne Corp. of Alexandria; $ 9.75 to $ 6.13, down 37 percent. A
manufacturer of telemetry receivers and communications equipment, the company
saw its stock drop sharply in June when it said it would have a shortfall in its
profit.endquad


                             1369 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1992 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                  October 3, 1992, SATURDAY, FIVE STAR Edition

SECTION: EVERYDAY MAGAZINE; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 723 words

HEADLINE: WOMEN HOLD SECRETS OF LONG LIVES

BYLINE: Lisa M. Krieger San Francisco Examiner

BODY:


   WOMEN, long assumed to be the ''weaker sex,'' carry within them the secrets
oflongevity that, if better understood, could prolong the lives of millions of
men.  Until recently, no one has studied what it is about women's behavior,
biochemistry and genetic makeup that helps them live an average of seven years
longer than men, Dr. Bernadine Healy, director of the National Institutes of
Health, told a recent meeting of the International Women's Media Foundation in
Cleveland.  But biology is destiny, scientists are learning. And men and women
are not created equal.  ''It is important to understand the differences - not
deny them - and learn from them,'' said cardiologist Steven Nissen of The
Cleveland Clinic Foundation in Cleveland.  According to physiologist Estelle
Ramey of Georgetown University School of Medicine in Washington, D.C., ''such
research will help keep men alive longer and extend the viable life of men and
women so that they can squeeze through the door of life together, rather than
apart.'' The gap between the life spans of the sexes already has begun to
shrink, narrowing from 7.8 years in 1970 to seven years.  Part of the change is
behavioral: Men are drinking less and smoking fewer cigarettes. Some are better
managing the stresses that trigger hormone-fueled Type A behaviors.  Men are
also beginning to benefit from innovations in medical treatments, some first
suggested by studies in women. For instance, one recent landmark study found
that estrogen therapy can help ward off heart disease in men. Another
soon-to-be-published study by the National Institutes of Health has found that
post-menopausal women on hormone-replacement therapy suffer from lower rates of
Alzheimer's disease. That suggests estrogen may also prolong the survival of
certain brain cells.  Among other applications of lessons learned in women,
doctors have observed that they are less likely than the average man to be
helped by a common operation for atherosclerosis, called balloon angioplasty,
perhaps because their vessels tend to be narrower than men's.  Much of the
success of women's longevity can be credited to one hormone: estrogen. It helps
remove harmful blood fats and prevents blood clots that lead to heart and
blood-vessel disease. The male sex hormone, testosterone, has the opposite
effect.  Another advantage is that women have two X chromosomes. The extra X can
offset one that is defective. Males, who have an X and Y chromosome, lack this
advantage. In the future, gene therapy could help correct these defects.
Women's immune systems are also stronger than men's, making them more resistant
to infectious disease. This will be a key area of further research.  Men's
physiological traits, once essential to survival, are now life-threatening. For
instance, men secrete testosterone and high levels of stress hormones that cause
them to react to stress more intensely than women, said Ramey. The hormones
cause ''flight or fight'' responses that bring about faster clotting, a more
forcible heartbeat and increased blood pressure.  For primitive man, these
physiologic reactions were essential. But these same traits - which lead to
heart and blood-vessel damage and, ultimately, heart attack - can be deadly to
modern man in rush-hour traffic.  Throughout medical history, textbooks have
focused on the health problems of the mythical ''70 kilogram man.'' And so
doctors ''were trained to think of man as the generic human,'' said Dr. Susan
Blumenthal, chief of the Behavioral Medicine Research Program at the National
Institutes of Mental Health.  The women's movement didn't do much to change that
perception. ''We argued that we were the same as men, and to succeed, we played
by men's rules,'' said NIH's Healy. ''And because women were thought to be just
like men, we were not included in medical research.'' The implications for
health care are just beginning to be understood.  ''Is testosterone bad for men?
Is that part of the problem here? We'll never know, as long as the differences
between men and women are denied,'' said cardiologist Nissen.  Said Ramey:
''When you go to start a new business, do you study those that have failed - or
the success stories?'' ''We need to examine the successes of females,'' she
added, ''and apply the results to males, rather than the reverse.''

LOAD-DATE: October 12, 1993


                             1370 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1992 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                          September 30, 1992 Wednesday

SECTION: LIFESTYLE; Pg. E-5

LENGTH: 317 words

HEADLINE: Most OK limited altering of genes

BYLINE: Compiled from staff and news reports.

BODY:

   Most Americans support the altering of genes to treat disease and support
prenatal testing for genetic disease, according a Harris poll released
yesterday. The poll of 1,000 adults, commissioned by the March of Dimes, found
that 89 percent of Americans favored using gene therapy to treat disease, and 64
percent say they would opt for testing a fetus for genetic disease during
pregnancy. The poll also found that a majority of Americans opposed genetically
altering human cells to make better-looking or smarter children.

   The results come at a time of heated debate over the ethics of using genetic
science to alter nature, as well as the wisdom of finding out before a baby is
born whether it will have birth defects. Approximately 40,000 to 80,000 newborns
in the United States every year are afflicted with birth defects, including
sickle cell anemia, cystic fibrosis, and hemophilia, according to the March of
Dimes, which contributes $20 million annually to researching birth defects. "The
results confirm the basic American belief in science being able to do great
things for mankind," said Jennifer Howse, president of the March of Dimes. Eight
percent of those polled disapproved of gene therapy, and 32 percent opposed
prenatal testing. The number opposed to prenatal testing was up from 27 percent
in a poll in 1986. Opponents of prenatal testing have argued that it might lead
to women choosing abortion over giving birth to children with defects. The poll
also indicates that Americans are wary of using science to change nature's
design. According to the survey, 54 percent strongly or somewhat disapprove of
scientists changing the genetic makeup of human cells to alter physical
characteristics, and 55 percent of those polled oppose genetically altering
intelligence. Send notices of science events to Science Calendar, The San Diego
Union-Tribune, P.O. Box 191, San Diego 92112-4106.

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                             1371 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1992 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                  September 30, 1992, Wednesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 10A

LENGTH: 274 words

HEADLINE: Genetics vs. ethics

BODY:

    Once again, science has peeled out and left ethics eating its dust.

   Scientists' new hot rod: gene therapy, the experimental procedure that would
cure gene-triggered diseases such as sickle cell anemia by replacing flawed
strands of DNA with sound ones.

   Far from fearing this space-age vehicle, Americans strain to get behind the
wheel: 89% supported continuing research and using the technique, found a March
of Dimes Birth Defects Foundation poll made public Tuesday.

   Well they should. How it's used is the problem. Too many people appear
willing to ignore real ethical concerns:

   - 43% say it's OK to use gene therapy to improve children's inherited
physical traits; 42%, to make them smarter.

   - 57% say someone with suspect genes should not keep that fact private; 58%
of those say insurers should know; 33% say employers should.

   There lies danger. Where do you draw the ethical line in designing babies -
intellect, eye color, sex? Equally puzzling genetic dilemmas already are ripping
apart some people's lives.

   Just ask those who told Congress they've been refused insurance because
they're suspected of carrying the gene behind Huntington's disease. Or those out
of jobs because they carry even the trait for a disease, such as sickle cell
anemia.

   So far, only eight states bar job discrimination because of any genetic
tests.

   While Washington debates ethics rules, more states should adopt such
safeguards: Testing already is a reality; therapy appears to be a matter of
''when,'' not ''if.'' Doctors also should oppose any but strictly medical uses.

   Designer genes, yes. But bound with tight ethical stitching.


                             1372 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1992 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

                September 29, 1992, TUESDAY , LATE SPORTS FINAL

SECTION: NEWS; NATION BRIEFINGS; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 610 words

BODY:
 CAR DEFECTS INVESTIGATED: The government began a formal investigation of
500,000 Hyundai Excels after hundreds of complaints about manual transmissions
possibly causing the cars to lock up while in motion. The National Highway
Traffic Safety Administration said it had received 40 complaints that the drive
wheels on the 1986-89 cars suddenly lock up, resulting in skids and abrupt,
uncontrolled stops in the road. Hyundai told the government it had received 128
owner reports and 818 warranty claims for the transmissions.  NEW 'NEW YORKER:'
Racy Calvin Klein ads? Television reviews? Boldface type? Can this really be The
New Yorker? The magazine that represents the premier forum for American short
stories and in-depth non-fiction articles has come out with its first issue
under the tutelage of Tina Brown, the British-born former editor of Vanity Fair.
While radical surgery has been avoided, the magazine is clearly headed in a new
direction. It's heftier than most previous New Yorkers, with 178 pages printed
on a sturdier stock of paper. The articles seem more timely and some of its
cartoons are now in color. The magazine's cover is a traditional leaf-strewn
view of a Central Park horse-drawn carriage - but the passenger is a punk rocker
with a purple Mohawk haircut.  GENE-THERAPY POLL: Americans support using
genetic testing in ways that could invade privacy, a nationwide poll has found.
The Louis Harris survey of 1,000 adults was commissioned by the March of Dimes
to stimulate debate on social and ethical issues surrounding the medical
research. On the basic question of whether Americans support the use of gene
therapy to treat a genetic illness, 89 percent said they do. Asked whether they
would undergo gene therapy themselves to correct a serious or fatal genetic
disease, 79 percent said yes. But many Americans have little understanding of
what it is they say they support, the poll found. More than two-thirds, or 68
percent, said they know "relatively little" or "almost nothing" about genetic
testing. And 87 percent said they know "relatively little" or "almost nothing"
about gene therapy. Gene therapy is an experimental procedure to treat genetic
disease by restoring or replacing a missing or faulty gene in an individual.
Genetic testing involves testing the genes of a person to see if they have a
known defect associated with an illness.  BRADY BILL PUSHED: With less than a
week to go before Congress calls it quits for the year, handgun control
advocates are pressing the Senate to enact a five-day waiting period for gun
purchases. Police organizations and James Brady, the former White House press
secretary wounded during the 1981 assassination attempt on Ronald Reagan, are
among those making the last-minute push. The Senate voted nearly a year ago to
include the waiting period - known as the Brady bill - as an amendment to an
anti-crime bill. But that bill is in limbo because Republicans say it doesn't do
enough to limit death-penalty appeals. The Brady bill already has passed the
House. "There is still time to free the Brady bill from the crime bill," Brady
said.  WASTE CHANGES ON HOLD: The Environmental Protection Agency, responding to
massive criticism from environmentalists and Congress, said it will withdraw its
proposals to narrow the definition of hazardous wastes. EPA Assistant
Administrator Don Clay said response to agency proposals presented in April had
been overwhelmingly negative. "We decided it would be better if we wiped the
slate clean and started all over again," Clay said. The agency said it hopes to
implement new hazardous-waste rules within one to two years.

LOAD-DATE: September 30, 1992


                             1373 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1992 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                  September 29, 1992, Tuesday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: A; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 499 words

HEADLINE: Survey finds Americans back gene therapy, research

BYLINE: RUTH SoRELLE, Houston Chronicle Medical Writer; Staff

BODY:

   Most Americans support gene therapy, genetic testing and
genetic research, even though they have scant knowledge of the
procedures, according to a national survey released today by the
March of Dimes.

   That finding does not surprise Houston genetic researcher
Dr. Arthur Beaudet, who has targeted the genetic disease cystic
fibrosis during his work at Baylor College of Medicine.

   ""If they were better educated about it, there would be an
even higher level of acceptance,'' he said.

   In the survey of 1,000 adults conducted for the MOD Birth
Defects Foundation in April by Louis Harris and Associates, 89
percent said they approve of using gene therapy to treat genetic
diseases.

   Already, work in that area is going on at the National
Institutes of Health where two children with an inherited form of
immune deficiency are receiving a temporary form of gene therapy to
correct their conditions.

   In the future, scientists hope to expand the therapy to
other genetic diseases such as cystic fibrosis and Duchenne
muscular dystrophy.

   Gene therapists hope to insert a working copy of a gene into
cells where such a gene is lacking or malfunctioning.

   Eventually, Beaudet said, the therapies will extend to even
more common diseases, such as cancer or heart problems.

   About 79 percent of those surveyed said they would be
willing to undergo gene therapy to correct a serious condition, and
88 percent said they would be willing to have the therapy done for
any of their children.

   ""The March of Dimes believes gene therapy may soon become
the most important and powerful weapon against birth defects and
disease in human history,'' Dr.Jennifer L. Howse, president of the
national MOD group, said in a statement released with the survey.

   But understanding the procedure and its ramifications is a
necessary part of that, said Howse and Beaudet.

   More than two-thirds of those surveyed said they knew little
or nothing about the technique; 43 percent said they favor using
gene therapy to improve a child's appearance or physical
characteristics; and 42 percent approved its use to increase
intelligence.

   Those non-treatment uses of gene therapy have been opposed
by groups such as the MOD and ethicists concerned about possible
misuse.

   As currently envisioned, gene therapy would be used only to
replace faulty genes in the tissues affected by the disease.  The
corrected genetic blueprint would not be passed on to future
generations.

   Of those surveyed, 98 percent said one has the right to know
if his or her spouse carries a genetic defect.  Surprisingly, 58
percent said the person's insurer should know and 33 percent said
an employer has the right to know.

   Beaudet said the answers indicate the need for more
education about the benefits and pitfalls of genetic testing and
therapy.  Many ethicists have expressed concern that the results of
genetic tests could be used to exclude people from jobs or
eligibility for health insurance.


LOAD-DATE: October 23, 1992


                             1374 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1992 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

             September 29, 1992, Tuesday, San Diego County Edition

SECTION: Metro; Part B; Page 2; Column 4; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 866 words

HEADLINE: STUDY REVEALS PUBLIC'S IGNORANCE ABOUT GENETIC THERAPY, TESTING

BYLINE: By NORA ZAMICHOW, TIMES STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Seven out of 10 Americans say they know "relatively little" or "almost
nothing" about genetic testing, according to a survey released today.

   An even larger number -- 86% -- knew nothing about gene therapy, a field that
San Diego researchers are hotly pursuing.

   For scientists here, the survey results were like a splash of cold water --
somewhat startling, though not unexpected.

   "I expect that's typical of the general level of understanding about a lot of
scientific issues," sighed Dr. Theodore Friedmann, professor of pediatrics at UC
San Diego's School of Medicine and a pioneer in the field of gene therapy.

   "This is a relatively new field of medicine and science," Friedmann said. "It
wasn't discussed when many people who responded to the poll were learning their
science in school. It also says the science they do learn in school is probably
not adequate for modern times."

   The nation's first survey of public opinion on human genetics showed that
most Americans support the use of gene therapy to battle diseases and support
research in the field -- even though they know very little about it.

   Genes are packets of biochemical information that provide a map for the body,
directing it to develop and function in particular ways. Each person inherits
from his parents thousands of genes, which are arranged on the body's 46
chromosomes. The genes control growth, body chemistry, as well as exterior
features such as hair and eye color.

   Gene therapy is a medical procedure to treat a disorder or disease by
restoring or replacing a faulty or missing gene in a person's body. This
approach to medicine is the way of the future, many scientists say. In this way,
doctors would be able to correct a problem before the symptoms are even
manifested. But the therapy is still in experimental stages, with few people
actually undergoing gene therapy treatments.

   "It will have a major role in medicine in the future; the general idea of
gene therapy is highly accepted in medical and scientific communities, even
though it hasn't had a major test or proven itself yet," Friedmann said. "You
don't need a crystal ball, it's just common sense."

   The survey of 1,000 adults nationwide was conducted by telephone last spring
by Louis Harris & Associates for the March of Dimes, which finances a lot of
research in the genetics field.

   Dani Montague, executive director of the local March of Dimes chapter, said
the group was startled by the public's relative ignorance about genetics.

   "There's a real need for education," she said. "People understand there are
problems out there that are a result of genetic birth defects. If children can
be made healthy through gene therapy, then people understand that it's
worthwhile."

   In fact, a 4-year-old girl was the first recipient of gene therapy. The child
lacked an immune cell enzyme whose absence leads to severe immunodeficiency. In
late 1990, at the National Institutes of Health, she received cells carrying the
gene that she lacked. Today, it appears that the therapy worked.

   Clearly, gene therapy offers a different approach to medicine: curing the
body from within and preventing symptoms from developing. And some scientists
believe that, when they begin tossing around terms like "genes," people's eyes
begin to glaze over.

   "People basically turn off, they think this is not within their field of
comprehension," said Dr. Inder Verma, professor of molecular biology at the Salk
Institute. "When they think about genes and genetics, they think it's too
complex because there hasn't been enough education in high school or later."

   Nonetheless, though they may not fully comprehend the principles, people
support the notion, according to the survey. Here are the key findings:

   * The majority of Americans, or 89%, approve of using gene therapy to treat
genetic diseases.

   * Eighty-nine percent favor continuing research in the field.

   * Eighty-eight percent are willing to have gene therapy performed on their
children, and 79% were willing to have it performed on themselves.

   * Eight of 10 Americans said they would take genetic tests, before having
children, to learn whether their offspring would inherit a fatal genetic
disease.

   * Two of three Americans said they would endure a test during pregnancy (or
during a spouse's pregnancy) to learn whether the fetus had a genetic disease.

   * Nearly three-quarters believe gene therapy should be governed by strict
regulations.

   * Fifty-seven percent say that, if a person is a carrier of a defective gene
or has a genetic disease, then someone else deserves to know about it. Of those,
98% say a spouse or fiancee is entitled to that information, 58% think an
insurer should be informed and 33% say an employer should be informed.

   To scientists working in the field, the survey only spelled out the need for
more education among the public.

   "It's new, and people haven't been exposed to it. It's too new. And it's new
in the sense that there has never before been anything like this," said Dr.
Errki Ruoslahti, president of the La Jolla Cancer Research Foundation. "Now
would be a good time to develop some understanding because this is a methodology
that is coming."


                             1375 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



               September 29, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Page 2; Column 3; Science Desk

LENGTH: 712 words

HEADLINE: Many Americans Say Genetic Information Is Public Property

BYLINE: By NATALIE ANGIER

BODY:

   A MAJORITY of Americans believe that people found to carry a genetic disease
or a defective gene do not have a right to absolute privacy about their
condition, a survey has found. Among those thought to have a right to
information about a patient's genetic defects are not only people with an
immediate concern, like spouses and other family members, but insurance
companies and even employers.

   The results, being released today, suggest that Americans are not as wedded
to the concept of unequivocal patient confidentiality as many ethicists and
legal scholars might have thought or hoped.

    But the findings also imply to some that the public is extremely optimistic
about the progress of gene therapy and other experimental approaches to taming
inherited diseases, and that therefore the more open everybody is about genetic
disorders, the more quickly all will benefit.

Enthusiasm and Ignorance

    The survey was commissioned by the March of Dimes Birth Defects Foundation
and conducted by Louis Harris and Associates. In the study, 1,000 adults were
asked a series of questions about gene therapy and genetic testing. The survey,
which was conducted in April, has a margin of sampling error of plus or minus 3
percentage points.

   The findings painted a portrait of a public at once deeply enthusiastic about
the new science of gene therapy, in which patients receive healthy copies of
genes they lack, but admittedly ignorant of any details about who might benefit
or how. For example, 89 percent said they approved of using the novel approach
to thwart genetic disorders, yet 60 percent confessed they had heard almost
nothing about the technique.

   "This is what I find so surprising," said Dr. Jennifer L. Howse, president of
the March of Dimes. "There's a real anomaly between the public's overwhelming
approval for gene therapy, and its overwhelming lack of knowledge."

   More disturbing to other experts was that a sizable minority of respondents
condoned the possible use of gene therapy for conditions beyond disease. About
43 percent of those polled said they either somewhat or strongly approved of the
use of gene therapy to "improve the physical characteristics that children would
inherit," while 42 percent approved of gene therapy, for example, to "improve
the intelligence level that children would inherit."

Open to Altering Traits

    "It's startling that people are so open to the use of genetic techniques for
the enhancement of certain traits, rather than the treatment of disease," said
Dr. LeRoy Walters, a bioethicist at the Kennedy Institute of Ethics at
Georgetown University in Washington.

   Experts suggested that these results could reflect the idea, which has won
wide exposure in recent years, that intelligence is largely a product of
inheritance. But scientists emphasize that they were far from being in a
position to manipulate the genes governing intelligence, if such genes exist.

   In questions about genetic testing, the public's answers again proved
unexpected. When asked whether someone other than a patient had a right to know
that the person had a genetic defect, 57 percent said yes. Of those who answered
positively, 98 percent said a spouse or fiance had a right to know, 58 percent
said an insurer had a right to know, and 33 percent said an employer deserved to
be so illuminated.

   Dr. Howse said the figures were surprising given how patients found to carry
the virus that causes AIDS have had such widely publicized difficulty in
obtaining or keeping medical coverage. And people suspected of carrying the gene
that causes Huntington's disease, a devastating neurological disorder that
normally strikes when a person is about 40, have testified before Congress that
they have been refused medical coverage. In theory, when insurance companies
discover that a person carries a genetic predisposition toward, say, breast
cancer, they could refuse coverage or make it prohibitively expensive.

   So far, only eight states have laws that prohibit employers from
discriminating against a person because of the results of a genetic test, and
most of those laws apply only to people found to carry the trait for sickle-cell
anemia. For other genetic diseases, the legal future remains an enormous
unknown.


LOAD-DATE: September 29, 1992


                             1376 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1992 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                   September 29, 1992, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 305 words

HEADLINE: Many favor gene therapy to enhance babies

BYLINE: Mike Snider

BODY:

    Many Americans would approve of genetic experiments, if they existed, that
would make smarter or stronger ''designer'' babies, a new poll says.

   The Harris poll of 1,000 adults, conducted for the March of Dimes, shows 43%
would approve of using gene therapy to improve babies' physical characteristics;
42% would approve it for improving intelligence.

   This interest in potentially ''designing descendants (by) detecting problems
during pregnancy and using genetic engineering to perfect a baby'' is the ''most
disturbing aspect'' of the poll, says medical ethicist Arthur L. Caplan,
University of Minnesota. ''This indicates there will be tremendous pressure from
consumers to improve the next generation or future generations.''

   Gene therapy experiments involve restoring or replacing missing or faulty
genes. Researchers may some day use it to treat cancer, cystic fibrosis and
muscular dystrophy.

   Says March of Dimes president Dr. Jennifer L. Howse: ''It's very important
that we stress the goal of gene therapy is to make sick babies healthy, not
normal babies perfect.''

   Most people support the research and treatment, but many don't understand it
and are concerned about the ramifications, the poll suggests.

   Other findings:

   - 79% would undergo gene therapy to correct a serious or fatal genetic
disease.

   - 87% know little or nothing about gene therapy; 68%, about genetic testing.

   - 58% said insurers deserve to know if someone is a carrier of a defective
gene or has a genetic disease, 33% said employers should know.

   - 73% think potential dangers from genetic alteration of cells is so great
that strict regulations are needed.

   The March of Dimes used the poll findings to make new informative materials
on genetic counseling, testing and therapies; local offices should have them
available.


                             1377 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1992 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                   September 29, 1992, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; PAGE Z5; THE CUTTING EDGE

LENGTH: 227 words

HEADLINE: MANY AMERICANS SAY GENE THERAPY OKAY

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Sandy Rovner

BODY:

   A large majority of Americans approve of genetic testing and gene therapy,
according to a survey, but not many understand what it is all about.

   The poll of 1,000 people, conducted by Louis Harris & Associates for the
March of Dimes Birth Defects Foundation, found that 88 percent would have a
child undergo gene therapy to prevent or cure a usually fatal genetic disease
found through testing; 79 percent would be willing to undergo gene therapy
themselves.

   Even so, many in the survey expressed concerns about ethics and privacy
issues. About three quarters believe "strict regulations" are needed for gene
therapy. More than half believe that if someone has a genetic disease, someone
else needs to know, but only about a third believed an employer should be
included. Ninety-eight percent say a spouse or fiance should be told, and 58
percent would inform an insurer.

   The March of Dimes supports current experimental work to use gene therapy --
restoring or replacing a missing or faulty gene in an individual -- but opposes
its use for non-therapeutic purposes. (The survey found 47 percent favored such
use to improve physical characteristics; 42 percent would allow its use to
improve children's intelligence).

   But Michael Katz, the March of Dimes research vice president, said, "Our goal
is to make sick kids healthy, not healthy kids perfect."


                             1378 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1992 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                   SEPTEMBER 28, 1992, MONDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A2

LENGTH: 851 words

HEADLINE: Optimism, Concern At Genetics Event
 S.F. gathering envisions breakthroughs

BYLINE: Charles Petit, Chronicle Science Writer

BODY:

    A rare public gathering of pioneers and leaders of the revolution in
genetics and biotechnology this weekend revealed a nearly unbounded pride and
confidence in their science.

   Yet the event also brought evidence of deep worries among scientists. With
population exploding, economies stagnant, disparate levels of education and
widespread political impatience, many wondered whether the world can get better,
with or without science.

   The Friday evening and Saturday meeting at the Palace of Fine Arts, sponsored
by the University of California at San Francisco and supported by numerous
wealthy patrons, foundations and corporations, was a series of lectures called
''Winding Your Way Through DNA.''

   Besides the 1,000 people in the audience, an additional 4,000 watched via
satellite link to halls around the Bay Area and in several sites in other
states. What they got was in some regards an unvarnished science lecture with
some of the world's most prestigious scientists.  Sessions were devoted to how
DNA makes genes, how genes are arranged along chromosomes, how scientists are
starting to understand the relations between genes and cell behavior.

   PUBLIC FEARS 'FADING'

   Harold Varmus, chairman of the production and UC San Francisco Nobel
laureate, said most of the early public fears about genetic engineering have
faded. Scenarios of deadly new diseases or genetic monsters are ''19th century
Frankenstein fantasies'' that never had much rational basis, he said.

   But Donald Kennedy, president emeritus of Stanford University and former head
of the Food and Drug Administration, said such worries will never disappear.
And, he said, they have some philosophical legitimacy.

   Maxine Singer, president of the Carnegie Institution of Washington, put it
another way: ''There will always be people who are disturbed by the idea that
physicians are tinkering with things they thought were beyond thinking about.''

   A Louis Harris public opinion survey being released this week shows
overwhelming public support for gene therapy and related research. But the poll
found that the public has scant specific knowledge, and found wide sentiment for
strict regulation.

   The most amazing results of genetic research are yet to come, speakers
agreed.

   ''Progress is now exponential,'' said Ira Herskowitz, UCSF's head of
genetics.

   For example, Herskowitz predicted that within 10 years, all the genes that
determine why some people are more susceptible to heart disease than others will
be located, and the proteins they control identified. Tests will determine a
person's odds for premature heart disease.

   GREAT STRIDES POSSIBLE

   Other speakers told of more productive crops, sure-fire identification of
criminals and transformation of living creatures into factories for products
from plastics to superior new fibers and drugs.

   But throughout the meeting and during press conferences and interviews with
speakers, worry about the future was as thick as optimism over the growing
powers of the technology.

   Two concerns seemed most prominent: Whether the public and politicians
understand how science works and whether the world and its people are caught up
in events that are out of control.

   ''World population will double by the year 2030, to 10 billion people,'' said
Roger N. Beachy, head of plant biology at Scripps Research Institute in La
Jolla. ''We must produce more calories in the next 40 years than in the entire
history of mankind. . . . Feeding the next 5 billion people is not going to be
as easy as feeding the last 5 billion people.''

   Beachy was confident that better farming methods, healthier economies and
development of crops resistant to pests and drought and able to yield more
nutrition on less fertilizer can, in principle, feed a growing world.

   POLITICS AND SCIENCE

   But, he said, world governments must move rapidly to feed the Third World,
where nearly 90 percent of births occur each year. ''I can only do what I do
best,'' which is work on genetically engineered crops, ''and hope that the
politicians find a way to do their own jobs as well.''

   A physicist, Leon Lederman, former director of the Fermi National Accelerator
Laboratory, closed the session by arguing that the public and policymakers often
do not seem to understand that science is a meandering process with
unpredictable results.

   Currently, he said, many private industrial research labs are shrinking. In
Congress, a mood is building to support less basic research -- which has no
clear practical purpose -- and to support applied research, in which goals
clearly beneficial to society are set.  This, Lederman said, could gradually
slow scientific progress by delaying surprising but potentially revolutionary
discoveries in fields that have no readily apparent payoff.

   He called for a ''united, sustained'' effort by the nation's 3 million
scientists and engineers to improve science education and public awareness. As
another speaker, Barry Bloom of the Albert Einstein College of Medicine put it:
''One of the wonders of science is that odd people are able to pursue odd
subjects.''



                             1379 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1992 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                   September 28, 1992, Monday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; PAGE F7; REGIONAL REPORT

LENGTH: 752 words

HEADLINE: Manor Care Buys 3 Foreclosed Hotels

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: From News Services and Staff Reports

BODY:

   Manor Care Inc. of Silver Spring announced acquisitions of three mid-priced
hotels for about $ 8.8 million. The hotels -- in London, and Jacksonville and
Orlando, Fla. -- were acquired from lenders who had foreclosed on the hotels.
They have a total of 458 rooms.

   The company's chairman, Stewart Bainum Jr., said the acquisitions were made
to take advantage of opportunities in acquiring hotel assets in good markets at
low prices.

   The Jacksonville hotel will be operated as a Quality Inn while the other two
will be operated under the Comfort Inn franchise.

   Smithfield Foods Inc. is planning to move its Smithfield, Va., meatpacking
headquarters into a downtown Smithfield center that would include a museum,
restaurant, shops and a park, officials familiar with the project said.

   "It's about the best thing to happen in Smithfield in 100 years,"
restaurateur Ron Pack said.

   Pack, who is working to improve Smithfield's tourism trade, said the plan
calls for moving Smithfield Foods' headquarters from its site along Route 10 to
a new building in Wharf Hill, now a neglected area of the town.

   Genetic Therapy Inc. of Gaithersburg and Genetics Institute Inc. of
Cambridge, Mass., signed an agreement to jointly develop new treatments for
hemophilia.

   Under the agreement, the two companies will commercialize products using gene
therapy to treat the disease. The products will give hemophiliacs two proteins
essential to normal blood clotting, the companies said.

   M. James Barrett, chief executive of Genetic Therapy, said current treatments
for hemophilia simply control the side effects of the disease such as excessive
bleeding, but gene therapy products are designed to cure the disease.

   Genetic Therapy will have the exclusive right to market the products in North
America, and the manufacturing rights worldwide. Genetics Institute will have
marketing rights outside North America.

   Reynolds Metals Co. of Richmond and Sumitomo Light Metal Industries signed a
three-year agreement to share existing technologies and pursue joint research on
new technologies and processes to produce aluminum sheet applications for the
automotive industry.

   Pan American Independent Line of Brazil said it plans to ship South American
tobacco between Newport News, Va. and Richmond. The company will move about 200
tractor-trailer-sized containers of Brazilian and Argentine tobacco to the
Newport News port in mid-October, said Robert Armbruster of Norton Lilly
International. The tobacco then will be transferred to a Richmond-bound barge,
said Armbruster.

   Hangar Orthopedic Group Inc. of Bethesda said it had executed a letter of
intent to purchase Anne Arundel Orthopaedics Inc. of Annapolis. Terms were not
disclosed. Hangar said the management team of Anne Arundel will remain in place.

   Systems Center Inc. of Reston said it had concluded an agreement to sell
certain UNIX utility products to Raxco Software Inc. of Rockville.

   Strategic Business Resources, specializing in accounting, tax and
microcomputer services, was formed in Alexandria.

   Schlegel & Schuster, a consulting and training firm for associations, was
formed in Washington.

   Creative Strategy of Washington will develop a circulation promotion package
for the New Republic magazine.

   Williams Whittle Associates of Alexandria will create a campaign to advertise
the National Zoo's exhibit on the Amazon river and its rain forest.

   Cornerstone Construction Inc. of Gaithersburg was awarded a contract to do
interior renovations for GTE Corp.'s downtown Washington location.

   Redman Communications of Bethesda will do advertising and marketing for Bowl
America Inc. of Alexandria.

   Television Communicators Media & Communications Services of Washington will
develop and execute a media and communications training program for the World
Children's Day Foundation, a Washington-based nonprofit organization.

   The Public Relations Partnership of Annapolis will coordinate a regional
promotional campaign for La Crista Inc. of Davidsonville, Md.

   Strategies in Marketing Communications of Baltimore was selected to create
and place introductory advertising for the Apple Market Center in Philadelphia,
a demonstration facility operated by Apple Computer Inc. to showcase computing
solutions for small- and medium-sized businesses.

   Announcements of news and developments affecting Washington area companies
should be sent to Regional Report, Business News Department, The Washington
Post, 1150 15th St. NW, Washington, D.C., 20071-5302.


                             1380 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



               September 26, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 1; Page 35; Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 443 words

HEADLINE: Patents;
Gelatin Capsules Revamped For New Generation of Pills

BYLINE: By Edmund L. Andrews

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   THEY are tiny bubbles of hardened gelatin, similar to the coated beads in a
capsule of cold medicine. But their inventors say these miniature spheres could
make it easier to administer a wide variety of new drugs and genetic therapies.

   Patented this week by a team of scientists at Massachusetts Institute of
Technology and Pennsylvania State University, the spheres are designed to store
delicate proteins, viruses and even living cells without destroying them.

    The most immediate application is likely to be producing pill forms of drugs
that now must be given by injection. But the more exotic possibilities are to
house genetically engineered viruses, which are being developed to treat genetic
disorders like cystic fibrosis.

   Looking even further ahead, the scientists say, the capsules could advance
the development of artificial organs like livers or pancreases. The hope is that
capsules could someday be used to protect, say, liver cells, which would be
transplanted into patients and then literally grow into a functioning organ.

   Microcapsules have been used for decades to release drugs into the
bloodstream at a measured rate, because the speed at which the capsule walls
break down can be controlled.

   The problem, the inventors say, has been that the process of making most
microcapsules is too harsh for proteins or living cells. Many pharmaceutical
proteins produced by gene-splicing, for example, can be rendered ineffective by
the heat used to produce the capsules. As a result, these drugs must usually be
injected directly into the bloodstream. The problem is even more serious for
customized viruses and transplanted cells, which must withstand attacks from the
patient's immune system.

   The new spheres are made from long-chained molecules called polyphosphazenes,
which are dissolved in water. The proteins or cells being encapsulated are mixed
with this solution to make tiny droplets. These droplets are then immersed in a
bath of either calcium salts or aluminum salts, where they harden.

   One of the inventors, Dr. Robert S. Langer, a professor of chemical and
biomedical engineering at M.I.T., said the principal advantage was that the
process was so mild it posed no threat to the proteins. In addition, he said,
the beads can be reliably tailored so that they admit small molecules, like
sugars and nutrients that a cell needs, while barring antibodies that might
attack it.

   Patent 5,149,543 was issued to Dr. Langer; Harry R. Allcock, a professor of
chemistry at Penn State, and four other researchers.

   Patents are available by number for $3 from the Patent and Trademark Office,
Washington, D.C. 20231.

LOAD-DATE: September 26, 1992


                             1381 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 1992 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                          September 24, 1992 Thursday
                                 SECOND Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C13

LENGTH: 412 words

HEADLINE: DRUG COMPANIES TO PAY COST OF FDA EVALUATIONS

BYLINE: The Associated Press

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   Thursday, September 24, 1992 DRUG COMPANIES TO PAY COST OF FDA EVALUATIONS

   The Food and Drug Administration needs to raise $350 million to  evaluate an
anticipated flood of new medicines for AIDS, cancer and other  now-incurable
diseases, the agency's commissioner says.

   To pay the hundreds of people it will need to hire, the agency wants to  bill
drug companies for evaluating the products they want to market. FDA
Commissioner David Kessler said the fees should raise $350 million over five
years.

   And the drug companies think it's a good idea.

   ``It's a rather unusual situation where a regulated industry seeks
additional resources for its regulator,'' Irwin Lerner, president of
Hoffmann-La Roche Inc., told the Senate Labor and Human Resources Committee on
Tuesday.

   Kessler testified the fees would pay for enough extra people to cut the
agency's time for processing applications to 12 months. FDA now takes an
average of 20 months to decide whether a new drug can be marketed, he said.

   ``The pharmaceutical, biotechnology and medical industries derive enormous
private benefit from FDA's review and approval,'' Kessler said. ``FDA approval
tells consumers that marketed medical products are safe and effective.''

   Kessler said the agency expects a burst of new applications in the coming
years as medical science advances to treat such diseases as cancer and AIDS.

   He said research may produce gene therapies for cancer, AIDS and multiple
sclerosis, ``growth factors'' that would help wounds heal quickly, and drugs
that would regenerate organs to help or replace ones that are damaged.

   The coming advances may make the current state of medical art seem ``as
primitive as blood letting seems to us now,'' Kessler said.

   The money raised from the user fees would be on top of what Congress  already
gives to the FDA and would allow the agency to hire 600 new employees, Kessler
said.

   The idea is supported by the administration, by Democrats in Congress and  by
the industry.

   But Sen. Orrin Hatch, R-Utah, said he's not sure he likes it. He ticked off a
handful of reasons, including the possibility of causing more regulations  and
raising the costs of drugs.

   ``As you can see, I'm not in the best of moods,'' Hatch said at the end of
his list of complaints.

   The House and Senate are considering similar legislation, and Sen. Edward
Kennedy, D-Mass., chairman of the Labor Committee, said Congress may still be
able to pass a bill on the fees before it adjourns this year.

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 2006


                             1382 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1992 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                  SEPTEMBER 24, 1992, THURSDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 706 words

HEADLINE: First Successful DNA Screening Of Test-Tube Embryos Reported

BYLINE: Charles Petit, Chronicle Science Writer

BODY:

    Medical researchers in Britain and Texas reported yesterday the first
successful screening of ''test-tube'' embryos for genetic defects.

   The method, which resulted in the birth of a healthy baby girl to parents who
both carried genes for cystic fibrosis, could help many couples who must now
wait nine weeks or more into a pregnancy for standard tests for certain genetic
defects, researchers on the project said.

   The researchers used DNA tests on tiny clusters of cells just 3 days old to
detect which ones were nearly certain to produce children with cystic fibrosis.
Those embryos were discarded.

   The work could lead to tests for a variety of genetic diseases in embryos at
the earliest stage of development, a benefit to infertile couples who must
resort to ''in vitro fertilization'' or test-tube births and to some couples who
know that they have a high chance of passing on genetic defects to their
offspring. It may also be a step toward gene therapy in which embryos get
treatment to correct flawed or missing genes.

   EXPENSIVE METHOD

   At the same time, some experts said, the embryo method is inherently
expensive, with a cost of $ 5,000 to $ 7,000 per attempt at a test- tube
pregnancy; may not be very reliable and can directly benefit only a small
portion of people planning families.

   A report on the birth is in today's issue of the New England Journal of
Medicine. The leaders were genetics researcher Alan H. Handyside at the Royal
Postgraduate Medical School in London, and Dr. Mark R. Hughes of Baylor College
of Medicine in Houston.

   The couples involved in the work were all English, and the procedure was
carried out at Hammersmith Hospital in London. Current U.S. policy discourages
research on human embryos and forbids use of federal money for such work.
However, once perfected, the method could be widely used in U.S.  hospitals even
if some cost is born by federal programs. The Baylor group is proceeding with
plans to try the method to detect such diseases as Tay-Sachs, sickle cell anemia
and muscular dystrophy in embryos.

   The volunteers for the study were three couples in which both members carry
the gene for cystic fibrosis. The disease can be fatal, and it causes, among
other problems, a build-up of thick mucus in the lungs.

   From eggs harvested from the women and sperm from the men, the British team
produced 13 embryos that advanced after three days to at least the eight-cell
stage of division. Under a microscope, they took a single cell from each.

   EMBRYONIC CELLS

   The Baylor team then used a method called polymerase chain reaction to
multiply the genes from the embryonic cells by many thousands of times,
providing enough DNA to spot the defect. The researchers found three embryos
completely free of the defective gene, three with one good and one bad gene
apiece, and five that got the cystic fibrosis gene from both parents and almost
certainly would produce children with the ailment.

   One couple produced only embryos with a double dose of the defective gene.
The other two women each were reimplanted with two embryos. Only about 30
percent of in vitro fertilization attempts produce pregnancies, and in this case
one of the women got pregnant, with a single fetus developing in her womb. The
other woman did not get pregnant.

   The pregnancy produced a healthy, 7-pound, 3-ounce girl. Follow-up tests
during pregnancy and after birth confirmed that she does not carry the gene for
cystic fibrosis.

   Researchers around the world have been working toward such ability, and many
expect the method to become generally available.

   ''This is something we plan to be able to offer in the future, including
embryo biopsy and analysis,'' said Dr. James Goldberg, an assistant professor of
obstetrics and gynecology at the University of California at San Francisco,
which has a large program for in vitro fertilization and related research.

   He said the work shows that even more dramatic medical abilities are likely
to arise. Among them may be gene therapy that replaces or repairs missing or
flawed genes. Such methods might be sought by parents unable to produce
offspring without genetic defects, but who are determined to have children that
genetically are their own.



                             1383 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                           Times Publishing Company
                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                   September 24, 1992, Thursday, City Edition

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 4A

LENGTH: 479 words

HEADLINE: Women carry longevity secrets

SOURCE: San Francisco Examiner

BODY:


   Women, long assumed to be the "weaker sex," carry within them the secrets  of
longevity that, if better understood, could prolong the lives of millions  of
men.

   Until recently, no one has studied what it is about women's behavior,
biochemistry and genetic makeup that helps them live an average of seven years
longer than men, Dr. Bernadine Healy, director of the National Institutes of
Health, told a meeting of the International Women's Media Foundation in
Cleveland recently.

   But biology is destiny, scientists are learning. And men and women are not
created equal.

   "It is important to understand the differences - not deny them - and learn
from them," said cardiologist Steven Nissen of The Cleveland Clinic  Foundation
in Cleveland.

   According to physiologist Estelle Ramey of Georgetown University School of
Medicine in Washington, D.C., "such research will help keep men alive longer
and extend the viable life of men and women so that they can squeeze through
the door of life together, rather than apart."

   The gap between the life spans of the sexes already has begun to shrink,
narrowing from 7.8 years in 1970 to seven years.

   Part of the change is behavioral: Men are acting like women, drinking less
and smoking fewer cigarettes. Some are better managing the stresses that
trigger hormone-fueled Type A behaviors.

   Men are also beginning to benefit from innovations in medical treatments,
some first suggested by studies in women. For instance, one recent landmark
study found that estrogen therapy can help ward off heart disease in men.

   Another soon-to-be-published NIH study has found that post-menopausal women
on hormone replacement-therapy suffer from lower rates of Alzheimer's disease.
That suggests estrogen may also prolong the survival of certain brain cells.

   Men begin life far ahead of women, at least in sheer numbers. At  conception,
male fetuses outnumber females 115 to 100; at birth, the ratio has  fallen to
about 105 boys to 100 girls. But by age 80, there are twice as many  women as
men.

   Much of the success of women's longevity can be credited to one hormone:
estrogen. It helps remove harmful blood fats and prevents blood clots that  lead
to heart and blood-vessel disease. The male sex hormone, testosterone,  has the
opposite effect.

   Another advantage is that women have two X chromosomes. The extra X can
offset one that is defective. Males, who have an X and Y chromosome, lack this
advantage. In the future, gene therapy could help correct these defects.

   Throughout medical history, textbooks have focused on the health problems  of
the mythical "70 kilogram man." And so doctors "were trained to think of  man as
the generic human," said Dr. Susan Blumenthal, chief of the Behavioral  Medicine
Research Program at the National Institutes of Mental Health.

LOAD-DATE: October 16, 1992


                             1384 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1992 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                  September 20, 1992, Sunday, Bulldog Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 31; Column 1; Advance Desk

LENGTH: 577 words

HEADLINE: SUFFERERS OF INHERITED 'BODY GLUE' AILMENT FIND HELP IN UNIQUE CLINIC;

EHLERS-DANLOS: DETROIT FOUNDATION DEALS WITH A LITTLE-KNOWN SYNDROME IN WHICH
THE 'GLUE' THAT IS SUPPOSED TO HOLD BODIES TOGETHER SIMPLY DOESN'T.

BYLINE: By JILL ENGLEDOW, ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: DETROIT

BODY:

   From "floppy" babies with dislocated hips to people grateful to have lived to
age 50, the group of patients who gathered at Hutzel Hospital had something in
common: The collagen "glue" that is supposed to hold their bodies together
doesn't.

   A little-known disorder of the connective tissues, Ehlers-Danlos syndrome,
creates loose connections in its victims' bodies: ligaments that stretch,
tissues that tear and joints that easily dislocate.

   The condition, often inherited, affects an estimated one in 5,000 people. It
often is misdiagnosed.

   Seven-year-old Stephanie Hicks was lucky enough that her case was discovered
early. The Louisville, Ky., girl was born with a dislocated hip, had surgery at
age 6 and spent 10 weeks with her torso and most of one leg in a case.

   This is lucky?

   Ehlers-Danlos children also can damage themselves easily -- for example, with
finger tricks like bending a pinky back until it is flat against the hand.

   Mark Lavallee was diagnosed at age 3. Now 24, the Penn State University
medical student never let the instability of his joints or the fragility of his
skin slow him. He used weightlifting to overcome his tendency to dislocate
joints. He has worked as a firefighter.

   But he paid for his tenacity. He has spent a lot of time at the plastic
surgeon's office and has severe scarring.

   Bonnie Harp, of Phoenix is happy to have beaten the odds and lived to age 56.
For four generations, some of her relatives have died in their 40s because of
the syndrome.

   Harp has had operations for collapsed lungs, pulmonary embolisms, spinal and
gynecological problems. "I've been called a freak many times," she said.

   There were many dramatic stories shared at a gathering in August by 78
patients at Hutzel Hospital. People told of spontaneous bleeding and multiple
surgeries, careers derailed and parents wrongly accused of abusing children who
bruise at the lightest touch.

   Sufferers from across the United States and Canada came to the hospital for a
clinic, to be examined by professionals from five medical specialties in order
to establish a database about the mysterious syndrome.

   The disorders that make up the syndrome have an array of symptoms bewildering
to doctors as well as patients, differing among the 10 known types of the
syndrome and among individual patients.

   Patients ranging from 1 year to over 60 were prodded, questioned and measured
in a project organizers said was the first of its kind for any disorder.

   The clinic was the fourth annual conference of the Ehlers-Danlos National
Foundation, headquartered in suburban Southgate.

   Earlier conferences provided information and support for patients. But as
doctors at those meetings listened to patients, "It became obvious that what we
knew about was a tiny fraction of what we ought to know about EDS," said Mark
Evans, a gynecologist and geneticist at Hutzel.

   Evans, along with Nancy Rogowski, who created the foundation, and Dr. Petros
Tsipouras of the University of Connecticut in Farmington, planned the clinic.

   "We generated more data about Ehlers-Danlos in these three days than has ever
been known in the history of the world," Evans said.

   Although Evans said he sees limited potential for a cure for Ehlers-Danlos,
Tsipouras believes the syndrome may be cured one day through gene therapy.

   For more information about the Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome, contact the
Ehlers-Danlos National Foundation at P.O. Box 1212, Southgate, Mich., 48195.


                             1385 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                           Times Publishing Company
                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                   September 17, 1992, Thursday, City Edition

SECTION: NATIONAL; DIGEST; Pg. 2A

LENGTH: 462 words

HEADLINE: Gallbladder removal technique touted

DATELINE: WASHINGTON; BOSTON

BODY:


   A blue-ribbon medical panel Wednesday endorsed a new technique for
gallbladder removal they found as safe and effective as the traditional open
abdomen surgery, the National Institutes of Health said. The surgery, called
laparoscopic cholecystectomy, has been in use since 1988, but the panel
recommended it be done only by experienced surgeons and only in otherwise
healthy patients who have painful gallstones. The new technique involves only
four minor incisions in the abdomen and recovery takes only a few days to two
weeks as opposed to a month or more with traditional surgery. But the panel
cautioned that it not be used on women in the third trimester of pregnancy,
people with gallbladder cancer, inflammation of the abdomen or other serious
conditions.

Spinal cord operation tested

BOSTON - Doctors have begun testing a new operation intended to repair damaged
spinal cords in paralyzed patients. In the journal Brain Research, doctors  from
Boston University described experiments on eight cats whose spines had  been
surgically severed. Two regained some ability to walk, although their
hindquarters had to be supported. A review board at the university's medical
center recently gave the physicians permission to try the operation on 12
patients, and six already underwent the procedure. Officials declined to
discuss the results so far.

Gene therapy approved for lung cancer

The first gene therapy treatment for lung cancer has received the unanimous
approval of an important federal panel, bringing the once-rarefied and
experimental science of manipulating human genes to bear on the most common
cause of cancer death in America. Dr. Jack A. Roth of the M. D. Anderson  Cancer
Center in Houston received permission from the Federal Recombinant DNA  Advisory
Committee on Tuesday to treat 14 patients suffering from a fatal type  of lung
cancer called non-small cell carcinoma, a disease often caused by  smoking. The
Food and Drug Administration must approve the treatment before  human trials
begin. Experts say much remains to be learned before anybody will  know how
effective the approach is.

Bill limits smoking at children's programs

WASHINGTON - The Senate voted Wednesday to restrict smoking at thousands of
federally financed programs for children, accepting arguments that it is
dangerous to needlessly expose young people to a carcinogen. The measure would
affect indoor smoking at federally financed programs that serve children under
5, such as Head Start and feeding, health and day-care facilities. Smoking
there would be limited to areas not usually used to serve children and which
are ventilated separately from children's areas.

LOAD-DATE: October 15, 1992


                             1386 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1992 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle



                 September 16, 1992, Wednesday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: A; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 390 words

HEADLINE: Panel gives Houston researcher OK on lung cancer gene therapy

BYLINE: RUTH SoRELLE, Houston Chronicle Medical Writer; Staff

BODY:

   A federal panel on Tuesday cleared the way for a Houston
researcher to use gene therapy to fight lung cancer -- the No.1
cancer killer in the United States.

   The proposal will fight lung cancers associated with two
types of genetic defects, said Dr.Jack Roth, chairman of the
University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center's thoracic surgery
department.

   In one form, Roth said, a cancer-causing gene or oncogene
called K-ras produces a protein that prompts the chance of
malignancy.  In other forms, a missing p53 gene takes the brakes off
the cell's ability to divide and reduces the cell's capability of
repairing defective DNA.

   One or the other of the genetic defects is found in the
168,000 new cases of lung cancer diagnosed in the United States
each year.

   Roth, in a telephone interview from Bethesda, Md., said he
and his colleagues have designed specific therapeutic techniques to
interrupt the genetic misdirections caused by these two genes.  The
recombinant DNA advisory committee of the National Institutes of
Health gave him unanimous approval to start testing the procedures
in humans.

   All that is left is for Roth to obtain approval from the
U.S. Food and Drug Administration and to get the go-ahead from NIH
director Bernadine Healy.

   The K-ras gene initiates production of an abnormal protein
that causes lung cells to become malignant, Roth said.  He has
designed a way to induce cells in the laboratory to produce an
""anti-sense'' protein that will bind to the K-ras protein,
rendering it inactive.

   Roth plans to use a non-disease-causing retrovirus to take
the anti-sense gene into the cell and incorporate it into the
cell's own genetic code.  The cell then will manufacture both
proteins, which should cancel each other out.

   ""This the first time anti-sense will be used in patient
treatment,'' Roth said.

   He is taking another approach to cancers associated with a
missing or defective p53 gene.  Normally, the p53 gene allows cells
to divide normally at a slow rate and repairs defects that occur in
the DNA or genetic material, Roth said.

   When p53 is missing or inactivated, ""it's like losing the
brakes on a car,'' he said.

   He plans to insert working copies of p53 into lung cancer
cells, modifying their genetic makeup so that they are no longer
malignant.


LOAD-DATE: September 17, 1992


                             1387 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



              September 16, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 20; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 702 words

HEADLINE: U.S. Clears Use of Gene Therapy Against a Form of Lung Cancer

BYLINE: By NATALIE ANGIER

BODY:

   The first gene therapy treatment for lung cancer received the unanimous
approval of an important Federal panel yesterday, bringing the once-rarefied and
experimental science of manipulating human genes to bear on the most common
cause of cancer death in America.

   Dr. Jack A. Roth of the M. D. Anderson Cancer Center in Houston received
permission from the Federal Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee to treat 14
patients suffering from a fatal type of lung cancer called non-small cell
carcinoma, a disease often caused by smoking.

    The method he has devised is another first in the field of gene therapy, an
attempt to add molecules that will switch off genes in the tumor cells thought
to contribute to frenzied cell growth. In standard gene therapy procedures like
those designed to treat hereditary disorders, scientists provide patients with
new copies of genes to replace genes the patients lack.

   But the new approach, called anti-sense gene therapy, could prove useful for
attacking a wide spectrum of diseases caused not by missing genes but by genes
gone awry. Cancer is thought to result in part when normal genes are mutated by
cigarette smoke or other environmental insults into overactive and aggressive
configurations; the anti-sense method tries to shut down the offending mutant
genes.

F.D.A. Approval Needed

    Today, Dr. Roth will present his proposal to the Food and Drug
Administration, whose approval is necessary before he can begin human trials. He
said he is unlikely to start the experiments before the end of the year. And
much remains to be learned before anybody will know how effective the approach
is, experts said.

   "In theory it's a very promising approach," said Dr. Daniel Ihde, deputy
director of the National Cancer Institute in Bethesda, Md. "But it remains to be
seen if anti-sense can really work in human patients."

   Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer death in both men and women in the
United States. This year about 168,000 Americans are expected to contract the
tumor, and about 146,000 already suffering from the malignancy will die of it.
The cancer is often fatal; standard treatments like chemotherapy and surgery
usually fail.

   In the new approach Dr. Roth, a thoracic surgeon, will focus on patients who
have lung tumors that recur, who have not been cured by conventional therapies
and who are not expected to live longer than six months.

   He will begin by removing as much of the tumor mass as possible and
determining what sort of genetic mutation they harbor. He will be looking at two
genes commonly disturbed in lung and other types of cancer, one called the K-ras
gene and the other, p53.

   It is against the K-ras gene that he will apply the anti-sense strategy.
Taking a harmless virus to use as a molecular delivery vehicle, he will
biochemically stitch in a gene that is the mirror image of the cell's own copy
of the K-ras gene, the gene now out of control in the tumor. The viruses
carrying the mirror-image gene will then be injected into the patient's lungs by
using a fine needle inserted down a flexible bronchoscope tube.

   Once in the lungs, the viruses will infiltrate only those cells that are
dividing rapidly, the cancer cells, while leaving normal cells untouched. The
anti-sense gene will then turn on, and, because it is composed of the opposite
building blocks seen in the cell's own version of the gene, it can match up to
the components of the mutant K-ras molecule the way two sides of a zipper come
together. The zipped-up K-ras molecule can no longer work to produce dangerous
proteins

   By disarming the K-ras gene in enough cancer cells, Dr. Roth hopes to cause
the tumor to shrink or disappear.

   He will apply a somewhat different strategy for patients suffering from flaws
in the p53 gene.

   In either case, patients will receive a total of five gene therapy
injections. Although the procedure is not unbearable, Dr. Roth concedes that
anything done with a bronchoscope is far from comfortable.

   Should the technique prove successful, he said, it will be most useful for
those in the early stages of cancer or those who suffer from syndromes like
Barrett's esophagus, which often precedes throat cancer.

LOAD-DATE: September 16, 1992


                             1388 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



              September 16, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1187 words

HEADLINE: NEWS SUMMARY

BODY:


   International     A3-15

THE SUFFERING OF SUDAN

   In the southern Sudan, war, famine and the Government's scorched-earth policy
have displaced more than a million people, but constant shelling means that
relief flights have been only sporadic.  A1

U.N. AS ECOLOGICAL BATTLEFIELD

   The 47th United Nations General Assembly convened today, poised for a new
battle between the West and developing countries over environmental issues.  A10


TAKING AIM AT THE EUROCRATS

   Taking a cue from the Thatcherites, the French are fearful of the
homogenizing effect a European "super state" might have.  A12

   Italy says its voters would ratify the European Union pact.  A12

THE VIEW FROM NUMBER 8

   Serbian gun position Number 8, and emplacements like it, afford a commanding
advantage, but the war in Sarajevo does not appear to be one they wish to win in
any conventional sense.  A3

PENTAGON CHANGES COPTER STORY

   After denying that a U.S. helicopter had been hit by gunfire in Bosnia, the
Pentagon said today that closer in inspection revealed a small bullet hole.  A3

PERU'S SHANTYTOWN WAR RAGES

   The violence continues uninterrupted in the shantytowns of Lima, despite the
fact that the leader of the Shining Path, Abimael Guzman Reynoso, is now behind
bars.  A10

FROM ATLANTA TO BAGHDAD

   A bank fraud case in Atlanta has shed light on how Iraq illegally obtained
billions of dollars in loans, some of which was vital to Saddam Hussein's arms
buildup.A6

A LOSS FOR MEXICO'S OPPOSITION

   The future of the major Mexican opposition party was in doubt as a member of
the governing party moved into the Governor's office in the historically
left-wing state of Michoacan.  A13

INDIAN POPULATION SOARING

   India, with a population of about 882 million, is likely to overtake China as
the world's most populous country by 2035, a report predicts. A9

Toshiba reportedly sold China a machine that may improve missiles.  A7
North and South Korea open their eighth round of direct talks.  A8
Political and economic tensions are forcing Lebanese to leave.  A5
Light sentences in attack on foreigner stir debate in Germany.  A14
Two leading Kurdish parties will merge their guerrilla units.  A15
Umm el Fahm Journal: Islam flowers in Israel.  A4

National     A16-22

NOMINEES POLITELY SPAR

   Speaking to National Guard officers, President Bush took note of the
questions on Gov. Bill Clinton's draft record, but maintained a distance from
them. Speaking to the same group, Mr. Clinton, in turn, ignored the issue
altogether.  A1

CLINTON KEEPS HIS LEAD

   The latest New York Times/CBS News Poll shows Gov. Clinton has the backing of
49 percent of the voters overall, while 37 percent say they are supporting
President Bush. The poll highlights the formidable task facing Mr. Bush and his
new political team.  A1

   Politics and the economy in a suburban Ohio town.  A17

BANK PREMIUMS CUT IN HALF

   Bowing to political pressure, Federal regulators slashed in half a proposed
increase in the insurance premiums banks pay to the deposit insurance fund --
and exempted three-quarters of the industry from any increase.  A1

STORM RUINS GO UP IN SMOKE

   With so much debris from Hurricane Andrew gathering dust and attracting
pests, southern Florida communities have had to do away with civilized niceties
like trash separation, recycling and environmentally safe disposal for the
quick, raw relief offered by fire.  A16

   Senators agreed to rebuild a scaled-down base in Homestead.  A16

BEHAVIOR AND BRAIN CHANGE

   A study has found that behavior modification therapy, like drug therapy,
produces changes in the brains of people with obsessive compulsive disorder. It
is the first time that behavior therapy has been shown to physically alter brain
function in a mental disorder.  A20

PLANETS BEYOND PLUTO?

   Astronomers have detected a small, faint object beyond Neptune and Pluto that
could be the first direct evidence of a broad belt of icy minor planets that may
be the source of many comets streaking in from the fringes of the solar system.
A22

   The first gene therapy treatment for lung cancer is approved.  A20

Simi Valley Journal: chili and white supremacists.  A16
Turning attention to the armed robbery of cars from drivers.  A21

Education Page   B10
Colorado will vote on giving parents public money to teach at home.
Brown announces an unusual plan to endow chairs for junior professors.
Campus Journal: Students plan mountain-climbing for a cause.

Metro Digest   B1

ABRAMS SEEN AS VICTOR

   State Attorney General Robert Abrams apparently edged out former
Representative Geraldine A. Ferraro in a bitterly close race for the Democratic
nomination for United States Senate from New York, setting the stage for a tough
fight with the Republican incumbent, Alfonse M. D'Amato.  A1

SOLARZ DEFEATED

   United States Representative Stephen J. Solarz, the nine-term incumbent from
Brooklyn, was defeated for re-election by Nydia M. Velazquez, who was thus
virtually assured of becoming the first Hispanic woman elected to represent New
York City in Congress.  A1

LETTING PUPILS PICK SCHOOLS

   Joseph A. Fernandez, the New York City Schools Chancellor, will let parents
send their children to any school throughout the five boroughs next year, giving
the city one of the largest school-choice arrangements in the nation.  A1

Business Digest   D1

Living Section   C1-10
 Emilia-Romagna: What Italians say to mean "the best." C1
At the door with Drew Nieporent.  C1
Serving up gardens by the glass, juice bars flow into the mainstream.  C1
Right out of the 60's, with plenty of hair.  C8
Wine Talk C10

Health Page   C14
Medicine by phone takes hold in some areas.
Personal Health: Why patients fail to comply with medical advice.

Arts/Entertainment  C15-22
Matisse vs. music.  C15
Lincoln Center nominates programming director.  C15
Anthony Perkins's wife describes two years of secrecy.  C15
Music: Honoring Alice Tully.  C15

Sports   B11-16
Baseball:White Sox top Yanks.  B11
Mets still waiting for lefty.  B13
Basketball: Nets' Mills accepts Pistons' offer.  B11
Columns: Vecsey on the Garden.  B11
Chass on Baseball.  B13
Football: DuBose ready to return to Irish.  B11
Handley opens up.  B15
A test for Thomas.  B15
Hockey: Rangers' Kovalwv gets attention.  B16
Devils stage a derby at center.  B16
Islander payroll mirrors performance.  B16
Sports People B14

Obituaries   D25
Walter B. Jones, Democratic Representative of North Carolina.
Dr. Alexander Marble, an expert on diabetes.
Garret G. Ackerson Jr., an envoy in Eastern Europe during cold war.

Editorials/Op-Ed  A24-25
Editorials
Bill Clinton's Vietnam test, cont'd.
Don't gut credit reform.
Gay bashing, the Quayle way.
Letters
Anna Quindlen: Great expectations.
Hans Magnus Enzensberger: Balkan tribalism, as Uganda sees it.
Alan C. Michaels: Baseball's charade.

LOAD-DATE: September 16, 1992


                             1389 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1992 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                   SEPTEMBER 13, 1992, SUNDAY, SUNDAY EDITION

SECTION: SUNDAY REVIEW; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 923 words

HEADLINE: Adventures on Genetic Frontiers Of Cancer Research

BYLINE: REVIEWED BY, DAVID PERLMAN

BODY:

    THE TRANSFORMED CELL

   Unlocking the Mysteries of Cancer

   By Steven A. Rosenberg, M.D., and John M. Barry

   G.P. Putnam's Sons; 353 pages; $ 24.95

   Steven Rosenberg, a surgeon and biophysicist at the National Cancer
Institute, has created a remarkable, totally engrossing book about the
revolution in medicine he is determined to help create.

   After years of imaginative research, he and colleagues W. French Anderson and
Michael Blaese (who are working with children born without functioning immune
systems) have launched the world's first tentative efforts to employ the
controversial technique called ''gene therapy'' -- endowing human patients with
genetic material specifically designed to combat deadly diseases.

   ''The Transformed Cell'' is at once a tribute to the extraordinary courage of
the patients who willingly undergo his demanding and often painful experiments;
a highly readable introduction to the sciences of immunology and genetics; an
insider's view of the labyrinthine bureaucratic paths that medical pioneers must
follow; and the autobiography of a driven physician.

   Rosenberg's quest began in 1968, he writes, when as a young and ambitious
doctor in training at a veterans' hospital in Massachusetts he operated on a
patient whose cancerous tumors had mysteriously and suddenly melted away.
Rosenberg reasoned that somehow the patient's own immune system must have
recognized the man's invading tumor cells as ''foreign'' and had killed them,
just as the normal human immune system can kill invading germs or alien
proteins.

   Rosenberg determined right then that he would somehow find a way to treat
cancer by ''immunotherapy,'' manipulating the immune systems of his cancer
patients so their own white blood cells would seek out and destroy the tumors
growing within their bodies.

    With help from his co-author, writer John M. Barry, Rosenberg reveals a
fascinating personality: bold, compassionate, immensely self-confident,
tenacious beyond belief and utterly convinced that his revolution is at hand.
That revolution is based not only on his concept of immunotherapy, but also on
his conviction that by altering the genetic material of immune system cells, he
can transform them into tumor-killing weapons. One day, he believes, genetic
manipulation may not only yield a true cancer vaccine but also ''could change
the way medicine is practiced in the twenty-first century.''

   As Rosenberg moves toward the breakthroughs he envisions, the book becomes a
thriller; it climaxes when he finally introduces the gene for a cancer-killing
human protein (tumor necrosis factor) into volunteer patients, near death from
malignant melanoma. Two die, one survives, and the era of gene therapy arrives.

   The main thread of this unique story, however, is the insight it offers into
the life of a dedicated scientist who is willing to buck endless paperwork, and
willing to face failure, which is often, or success, which is rare.

   ''There was an incredible feeling of peace doing this work, peace and
wonder,'' he writes of one all-night session in the lab. ''I always feel a sense
of awe looking into a microscope, watching live cells grow in cultures, knowing
that the cells individually meant little but that together they comprised a
mouse or a human being and that each individual cell was every bit as alive as a
mouse or a human.''

   While the compelling mystique of scientific research runs through this entire
book, Rosenberg is also devoted to his patients (he has treated more than 1,000
experimentally). What makes his story of medical investigation unique is the
humanity and compassion that mark the moving accounts he offers of his
individual patients. Most have suffered from advancing malignant melanoma, some
have been devastated by kidney cancer. Their names are fictitious, but their
stories are real.

   Among the volunteers for immunotherapy, for example, there was Sheila
Hopeland, small, frail, quiet, who ''seemed so gentle that paradoxically she had
a powerful presence.'' Rosenberg's tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes failed to stop
her disease, and she died. Linda Karpaulis, who endured her pain with ''a
stoicism that went beyond courage; it was a kind of innocence,'' tolerated the
treatment well, but it failed and she finally died at the age of 24.

   But then there was Linda Granger, a Navy nurse whose ambition was to reach
the rank of admiral. ''She always remained in control of herself -- perhaps too
much so.'' Rosenberg writes. Granger endured not only the same injections of the
protein called Interleukin-2 that Karpaulis had received, but also submitted to
repeated painful high doses of other white cells strengthened in their ability
to kill tumor cells. More than seven years later, all the melanoma tumors that
once riddled Granger's body have disappeared, and her Navy career is back on
track. Rosenberg is continuing his experiments with immunotherapy alone.

   And finally, only last year, Barbara Spengler came to his clinical center
from San Francisco, ''energetic, intelligent and upbeat'' despite her terminal
illness. She would be the very first patient to be treated successfully with
gene therapy. Her melanoma tumors shrank, and most disappeared. At this moment,
some 17 months later, no new cancer has returned, and Barbara Spengler is well.

   ''The results of treating one patient did not allow me to draw any
conclusions,'' Rosenberg writes as he ends his book. ''But I did know that she
responded. And I did know that we had pushed the door open firmly now.''

GRAPHIC: PHOTO,Human T lymphocytes, as seen under a scanning electron microscope
, FROM 'THE TRANSFORMED CELL'


                             1390 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1992 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                   September 13, 1992, Sunday, Final Edition

SECTION: BOOK WORLD; PAGE X5

LENGTH: 997 words

HEADLINE: The Cancer Hunters

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Fitzhugh Mullan

BODY:

   THE TRANSFORMED CELL Unlocking the Mysteries of Cancer By Steven A. Rosenberg
and John M. Barry Putnam. 353 pp. $ 24.95

   IN A brilliant essay written almost 20 years ago, the physician-philosopher
Lewis Thomas wrote of what he called "halfway technologies" -- treatment methods
that were effective in part, but generally imprecise, physically assaultive and
costly. An iron lung was a half-way technology. Polio vaccine is, in contrast, a
full technology, targeted, non-toxic, cheap. Thomas's message to science and the
public was to keep searching to find true, full technologies.

   For the most part, the treatment of cancer conforms to Thomas's concept of a
halfway technology. Chemotherapy and radiation deliver their toxic jolt to good
cells as well as bad, while surgery often sacrifices functional tissue along
with diseased. About the time Thomas wrote his essay, however, Steven Rosenberg
completed his residency in surgery and his doctorate in biophysics at Harvard
and took over as chief of surgery at the National Institutes of Health. Since
that time, Rosenberg has been a zealot in his pursuit of an immunotherapeutic
approach to cancer -- the full technology, the high technology of cancer
treatment. In The Transformed Cell: Unlocking the Mysteries of Cancer, Rosenberg
chronicles his hunt.

   Talented and practiced as a surgeon and as a lab scientist, Rosenberg's life
is an unlikely amalgam of action and cerebration, split-second decisions and
decade-long ideas. Early in his residency in Boston, he operated on a man in
whom a widely disseminated malignancy had been diagnosed 12 years before. When
Rosenberg examined the man's inner abdomen, all signs of the cancer were gone,
kindling the young surgeon's interest in the possibility that some form of
spontaneous immunologic response had killed off the man's tumor. This intuition,
bolstered by the established scientific facts that individuals with suppressed
immune systems have increased rates of cancer and that immune responses to
cancer had been demonstrated in lab animals, governed the course of Rosenberg's
work. From the time of his arrival at the NIH, he has labored to understand the
immunology of cancer and to craft that understanding into specific therapies.

   The story is one of startling achievement at the molecular level matched by
promise at the clinical level. Starting in the mid-1970s, Rosenberg and the team
of scientists he recruited identified, developed and tested a series of
immunologic agents that are variants of naturally occurring proteins and blood
cells. These include interleukin-2 (IL-2), a protein that stimulates the growth
of lymphocytes, lymphokine-activated killer cells (LAK) and tumor-infiltrating
lymphocytes (TIL), modified blood cells that possess targeted tumor-fighting
abilities. Moving these would-be therapies (and many sibling ideas that failed)
from the conceptual level, through the lab, and into clinical trials in humans
was a slow, intense and uncertain process that Rosenberg details with candor. By
1985, he had produced some dramatic results in a few patients with terminal
cancers while many others showed little or no response. In an effort to deliver
higher doses of targeted agents to cancerous tissue, he turned to the nascent
field of gene therapy, laboring to splice the code for a powerful anti-cancer
property, Tumor Necrosis Factor (TNF), into the lymphocytes of patients. In
early 1991, this therapy was attempted in three terminal patients -- the first
administration of genetic treatment in cancer. One responded well and gave
promise that a new generation of cancer therapy had begun.  ROSENBERG's work has
made him a known and, at times, controversial figure. In 1985, he participated
in surgery on President Reagan's colon cancer and dominated the press conference
that followed. His publication of the first successes of immunotherapy in the
New England Journal of Medicine later that year lead to an avalanche of
publicity and an attendant excitement in cancer patients throughout the country
who barraged the NIH with requests for treatment. Keeping science and public
hopes in perspective is not easy as Rosenberg concedes. "I now believe that
allowing the interview [with a patient undergoing treatment] was an error in
judgement on my part. I should have foreseen that it would . . . further
sensationalize the story."

   The Transformed Cell reads well and easily, making both the scientific and
human aspects of Rosenberg's life clear and interesting. Stories of patients are
neatly woven into the research narrative, leavening and illustrating the
technical facts that undergird the story. The book provides brief, provocative
looks at other aspects of science and public policy. At frequent intervals,
Rosenberg and his colleagues have collaborated with companies that supply key
elements for his experiments, but which stand to make enormous profits from the
outcome of his publicly funded research. New findings are public domain as far
as Rosenberg is concerned; the same discoveries are trade secrets to his
industrial partners. Likewise, he wrestles with and negotiates through the
protective bureaucracy of science -- institutional review boards, the
Recombinant DNA Advisory Board and the Food and Drug Administration. Rosenberg
might have spent more time exploring these difficult and little charted areas of
science ethics, regulation and commercialism since he has visited them so often
and with so much at stake.

   In fairness, though, Rosenberg is a hunter at heart. "When we started we were
looking for the slightest crack in the disease, a crack we could wedge open . .
. now we have found new cracks, new weaknesses in the sheer and bleak stone face
of cancer." The chase is on. Get through that crack, and Godspeed!?

   Fitzhugh Mullan, chairman of the board of the National Coalition for Cancer
Survivorship, is a physician and the author of "Vital Signs: A Young Doctor's
Struggle with Cancer."


GRAPHIC: PHOTO, VIEW THROUGH A SCANNING ELECTRON MICROSCOPE OF HUMN T
LYMPHOCYTES. CELLCO INC.


                             1391 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                September 11, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section D; Page 7; Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 57 words

HEADLINE: Genetic Therapy Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30

BODY:
                       ** COMPANY REPORTS **
                    Genetic Therapy Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30                            1992                 1991

Revenue                                456,235               66,257
Net loss                             1,591,610            1,081,095
Shares outst                         9,262,142            5,726,915
6mo rev                                831,940              122,979
Net loss                             3,389,065            2,181,122
Shares outst                         9,023,763            5,726,915




Revenue represented total revenue.

LOAD-DATE: September 11, 1992


                             1392 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1992 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                    September 7, 1992, Monday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; PAGE F7

LENGTH: 675 words

HEADLINE: Appointments

SERIES: Occasional

BODY:

   ASSOCIATIONS

   The National Association of State Development Agencies in Washington named
Jim Hawkins president.

   The American Home Economics Association in Alexandria named Mary Jane Kolar
executive director.

   Laura Brown was named assistant vice president of communications at the
National Association of Manufacturers in Washington.

   William Howell was named executive director of the science directorate at the
American Psychological Association in Washington.

   BANKS, FINANCIAL SERVICES

   GL Associates announced that Samuel T. Mok joined its Washington office as a
principal partner and board member.

   Discovery Communications Inc. in Bethesda promoted Dwight Crawford to vice
president of financial services, Mark Hollinger to vice president, deputy
general counsel, Tomi Bednar Landis as senior producer and Mark Kozaki as senior
manager of program evaluation.

   WF Corroon Herget Division in Baltimore named Mitchell C. Wiener vice
president and senior actuary.

   Barrueta & Associates of Washington named Paul C. Dougherty vice president
and Richard A. Vinci senior vice president of the Investment Services Division.

   Mary Ann Gonda was elected vice president and William E. Ore assistant vice
president of the Heritage Bank in McLean.

   John R. Kominski was named district manager for production and development in
the mid-Atlantic states for CIT Group/Industrial Financing in Baltimore.

   COMPUTER, HIGH TECHNOLOGY

   Raxco Inc. in Rockville appointed Grant T. Osasa senior vice president for
business development and strategic planning.

   Software Productivity Consortium in Herndon named Arthur Pyster senior vice
president and chief technical officer, Robert Glasser vice president of business
development and general counsel and Lynn Davidson vice president of finance and
administration.

   Sara W. Shick was named vice president at Applied Science Associates Inc. in
Landover.

   AimTech Corp. appointed Gary Benedetti director of federal systems at its
Bethesda office.

   CONSTRUCTION

   Mark A. Mona was named chief executive of the Mona Electrical Group in
Clinton.

   HEALTH


   Genetic Therapy Inc. of Gaithers burg appointed Robert C. Riley senior vice
president of business development and planning.

   Violet Bowen-Hugh was elected chairman of the board of directors of the
National Women's Health Resource Center in Washington and Amy R. Pryluck was
appointed executive director.

   HOTEL, FOOD SERVICES

   Steven C. Houfek was elected president of Doughtie's Foods Inc. in
Portsmouth, Va.

   The Washington Hilton and Towers named David W. Giger was named director of
sales-national accounts at the Washington office.

   Culinary Delights in Leesburg named Luisa Sonnek sous chef.

   LEGAL

   Shea & Gould named Reema Ali a partner with its Washington office.

   Shaw, Pittman, Potts & Trowbridge named Lewis S. Goodman partner and William
W. Senft associate.

   John J. Woloszyn and Joseph W. Janssens Jr. have been named a partners with
Semmes, Bowen and Semmes in Baltimore.

   Charles D. Ablard was named partner with Faegre and Benson in Washington.

   Fried, Frank, Harris, Shriver & Jacobson named J. Gail Bancroft counsel in
its corporate department in Washington.

   PROFESSIONAL SERVICES

   Porter/Novelli in Washington named Anton Schneider and Lynne D. Doner vice
president and Louisa Hart senior vice president.

   Ameritel Corp. in Rockville named David Kaufman vice president of sales.

   Greenwald Cassell Associates of McLean named Carl Landow as vice president in
charge of architecture.

   Howard G. Paster was named chairman of Hill and Knowlton Public affairs and
general manager of the Washington office.

   Project Performance Corp. in Sterling named Bruce L. Harlan senior vice
president.

   RETAIL, WHOLESALE TRADE

   Merchant's Inc. in Manassas named William A. Craig vice president of
administration.

   Send information about personnel moves to Newsmakers, Business News
Department, The Washington Post, 1150 15th St. NW, Washington, D.C. 20071-5302.
All material must be submitted in writing by the Monday preceding publications.


GRAPHIC: PHOTO, DWIGHT CRAWFORD


                             1393 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1992 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle



                   September 6, 1992, Sunday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: PARADE; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 479 words

HEADLINE: A Year Of Progress

BODY:

   NEW ADVANCES IN research continue to bring scientists closer
to the day of final conquest of the muscular dystrophy complex of
diseases.  Discoveries made by researchers funded by the Muscular
Dystrophy Association during the past year were particularly
significant and gained widespread recognition in the medical world.

   The "Harvard Health Letter", one of the most respected publications
in the field, surveyed 24 prominent medical experts.  They ranked the
advance in gene therapy by Jon A. Wolff, an MDA-funded redearcher,
among the 10 top medical achievements of 1991.

   Wolff was among the first researchers to attempt direct gene
therapy in a living organism.  MDA funds helped support injection of
the gene for dystrophin, the protein absent in patients with Duchenne
muscular dystrophy, into the muscles of mice with the same genetic
defect that causes this neuromuscular disease in humans.  According to
the "Harvard Health Letter", Wolff - who is affiliated with the
University of Wisconsin - achieved one of " a few leaps forward that
. . . yield new treatments or fresh insights into the mechanisms of
health and disease. "

   MDA Director of Science Technology Donald S. Wood points out that
Wolff's work can lead to benefits not only for people with muscular
dystrophy but also for those who have other genetically caused
illnesses like heart disease, epilepsy and cancer.  It was Muscular
Dystrophy Association-funded researchers who in 1986 identified the
gene responsible for Duchenne muscular dystrophy, thus laying the
foundation for many subsequent advances.  During 1991, a series of
research findings touched on more than a dozen of the 40 diseases in
MDA's program.  The association allotted $ 21 million during the year
to research alone.

   Although research is central to the MDA's work, the association
also is dedicated to meeting the needs of the tens of thousands -
many of them children - who already are affected.  Hospital and
clinical costs of diagnostic and follow-up care, wheelchair
purchases, orthopedic equipment, summer camps and many other aspects
of muscular dystrophy treatment are all part of the association's
work.  The largest single category in the MDA budget in 1991 was
patient and community-service expenditures, which totaled $ 51 million
- a sum that translates into direct benefits for patients needing
help, treatment, equipment and counseling.  In 1990, the MDA spent
76.7 percent of its income for program services - which led to its
being cited by "Money" magazine as one of the 10 "best-managed large
U.S. charities. "

   The 1991 Muscular Dystrophy Telethon raised a record $ 45.1
million.  Jerry Lewis' oft-expressed ambition is to have each year's
total of contributions by listeners exceed that of the year before.

   He says he hopes to do it once again this weekend.


LOAD-DATE: October 16, 1992


                             1394 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



               September 3, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section D; Page 5; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 247 words

HEADLINE: Executive Changes

BODY:


   ADVANCED TECHNOLOGY LABORATORIES INC., Bothell, Wash., a maker of diagnostic
ultrasound systems, appointed Harvey N. Gillis senior vice president of finance
and administration, and chief financial officer of the company.

COMPUTONE CORP., Roswell, Ga., a maker of circuit boards, appointed Edward L.
Marinaro chairman and chief executive, and Robert J. Niehaus president and chief
operating officer.



   COOPER INDUSTRIES, Houston, a manufacturer of tools, auto products and
industrial equipment, appointed Ralph E. Jackson Jr. executive vice president of
operations. John M. Monter was named to succeed Mr. Jackson as president of the
Bussmann unit in St. Louis.

F.A.O. SCHWARZ, New York, the toy retailer, named Carolyn Morrison senior vice
president.

GENETIC THERAPY INC., Gaithersburg, Md., a developer of human gene-therapy
products, named Robert C. Riley senior vice president of business development
and planning.

ITT CORP., New York, named Ann N. Reese senior vice president and treasurer.

MCA/UNIVERSAL, Universal City, Calif., a unit of Matsushita Electric Industrial
Co. of Japan, appointed Linda Berkeley senior vice president for business
development.

ORTHOMET INC., Minneapolis, a manufacturer of surgical products, named James C.
Hawley executive vice president.

PIONEER ELECTRONIC (USA) INC., Long Beach, Calif., a unit of Pioneer Electronic
Corp., Japan, appointed Shoichi Yamada president and chief executive.

LOAD-DATE: September 3, 1992


                             1395 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1992 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     August 21, 1992, Friday, City Edition

SECTION: NATIONAL/FOREIGN; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 710 words

HEADLINE: Gain found in cystic fibrosis research

BYLINE: By Dolores Kong, Globe Staff

BODY:

    In a breakthrough that could speed the search for lifesaving treatments for
cystic fibrosis, scientists reported today that they have developed mice with
symptoms that closely mimic the most common fatal genetic disease among
Americans.

   Researchers at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill report their
success in the journal Science. They beat out other groups around the world that
also have been working to develop an animal model since the cystic fibrosis gene
was identified in 1989.

   "This is a major, major discovery," said Robert J. Beall, executive vice
president for medical affairs for the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation, which funded
the research.

   "I think this is going to be a very important tool that is going to be
available to scientists. It will help put the final pieces together so that we
can get a cure for CF," Beall said.

   The disease affects about 30,000 people in the United States, many of whom
die by early adulthood, usually of pulmonary infections that result from thick
mucus in the lungs.

   But while the mice being reported on today have many of the symptoms of
cystic fibrosis, including failure to thrive and gastrointestinal blockages,
they have not yet shown the major respiratory complications so typical in humans
with the disease.

   That may either be because they have not had time to develop the
complications or because they have not yet been exposed to microbes that could
lead to infections, said Dr. Richard C. Boucher of Chapel Hill, an author of the
study. "When the animals live for a relatively short period of time in sterile
environments, they get very modest lung disease," he said. "I think the
important thing is that they did get a little."

   Lung disease does not appear right away in babies born with cystic fibrosis,
he said; usually it takes six months to a year to develop.

   Other researchers welcomed the news of the first animal model, which the
North Carolina researchers created by inserting a defective CF gene into mice
and breeding them to mimic symptoms of the disease.

   "It's a wonderful piece of work," said Alan E. Smith, senior vice president
for research for Genzyme in Cambridge, which is in the early stages of studying
gene therapy to replace the protein that cystic fibrosis patients are missing.
"It's taken a huge amount of time and effort."

   Dr. Henry L. Dorkin, director of the cystic fibrosis center at New England
Medical Center, agreed. "We've been searching for an animal model - 'we' meaning
the collective 'we' of physicians interested in cystic fibrosis - for a long,
long time," he said. "This animal model clearly has manifestations of CF that
are very consistent with those of humans."

   But both Smith and Dorkin said it is too soon to tell whether this model will
be the perfect parallel of the disease in humans, particularly with the absence
of respiratory complications.

   Currently, the main treatment for cystic fibrosis is antibiotics, to fight
pulmonary infections. Some drugs designed to attack the mucus are under study in
small human trials. And gene therapy to replace the protein missing in cystic
fibrosis has worked in a test tube at Genzyme and elsewhere.

   The mouse model promises to quicken the pace of research into potential
treatments, whether they be drugs or gene therapy, said Boucher and the CF
Foundation's Beall.

   Instead of taking years to get even preliminary results on drugs from a human
trial, it may only take months in a mouse model, Boucher said. "You can test in
a very short time frame. Are they safe and are they effective?"

   Within the next two weeks, the North Carolina researchers will use gene
therapy in an attempt to replace the missing protein in the mice, according to
Beall.

   But Dorkin said that while the mouse model is a major development, "It's
important for people to realize that this is not a cure . . . The thing this
will do, I think, is accelerate the study of new therapies, but in and of
itself, it is not a new therapy."

   In an unusual move, the North Carolina group will make the mice available to
other cystic fibrosis researchers at a nominal charge, a condition of the
funding by the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation. They will be distributed through
Jackson Laboratory in Bar Harbor, Maine.

LOAD-DATE: August 22, 1992


                             1396 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1992 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                     August 21, 1992, Friday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 233 words

HEADLINE: Gene-altered mice to fight cystic fibrosis

BYLINE: Tim Friend

BODY:

    Researchers have developed a gene-altered mouse with cystic fibrosis - an
accomplishment that will allow more rapid testing of new treatments for humans.

   This first animal model ''brings us much closer to the day when we can close
the book on this disease,'' says Robert Beall of the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation,
Bethesda, Md.

   The breakthrough is reported in today's journal Science.

   Cystic fibrosis occurs in 1 of 2,000 births and affects about 30,000 children
and young adults, causing bowel problems and fatal lung congestions. One in 20
Americans is an unwitting carrier of the disease.

   Now, researchers can:

   - Rapidly screen experimental drugs.

   - Develop new strategies for gene therapy.

   - Test combinations of new therapies not permitted in human clinical trials.

   ''Getting new concepts from the lab to the clinic has been frustrating, often
taking up to 18 months,'' says Dr. Richard Boucher, who led a team with
researcher Beverly Koller in developing the mouse model at the University of
North Carolina, Chapel Hill.

   To make the animal model, the team created a disruption on the normal mouse
CF gene similar to the mutation on the human CF gene.

   The disrupted gene was inserted in embryo cells that were implanted in
fertilized eggs then in female mice.

   An number of offspring became carriers of the disruption. Carriers then mated
and produced the mouse models.


                             1397 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1992 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                     August 21, 1992, Friday, Final Edition

SECTION: FIRST SECTION; PAGE A1

LENGTH: 1001 words

HEADLINE: Customizing Lab Mice;
New Strain May Aid Cystic Fibrosis Fight

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: David Brown, Malcolm Gladwell, Washington Post Staff Writers

BODY:

   In the laboratories of American biological research, there are mice that have
diabetes, mice that develop breast cancer, mice that are dwarfs and mice that
have the AIDS virus comfortably inhabiting nearly every cell in their bodies.

   There are mice whose names describe the effects of their own particular
genetic misfortune: the cone-head mouse, the nude mouse, the waltzing mouse and
the star-gazer mouse.

   And now this menagerie of morbid anatomy has a new and potentially very
valuable addition: the cystic fibrosis mouse.

   Cystic fibrosis (CF) is the most common lethal inherited disease among people
of European ancestry, and afflicts about 30,000 Americans. Although it results
from a defect in only one of the roughly 75,000 human genes, the disease is
widespread and crippling in its effects. Persons with CF typically have
digestive problems, cannot reproduce, are susceptible to repeated bouts of
pneumonia and die by age 35.

   The step-by-step ravages of CF have been difficult to study, however, because
its only victims are human beings.

   In today's edition of the journal Science, researchers at the University of
North Carolina report they have successfully created a population of mice with
defective copies of the CF gene. When two of these "carriers" mate, one-quarter
of the offspring have cystic fibrosis.

   Although the mouse disease is not identical to the human one, having an
animal "model" will allow scientists to look at CF in a living, though
dispensible, organism.

   "An animal model has tremendous value for developing new modes of treatment,"
said Susan Banks-Schlegel, director of CF research at the National Institutes of
Health. "Before you can go into a human, you have to evaluate something in an
animal. This is a major advance in progress toward that."

   In particular, the mouse could help break a logjam developing around proposed
gene-therapy treatments for CF, which cannot ethically be tried on humans
without extensive basic research on animals.

   The symptoms of CF arise from a defect in the "chloride ion channel" -- a
structure on the surface of cells that opens periodically to let atoms of
chlorine in and out. Somehow, defective chloride channels lead to the
overproduction of mucus in the walls lining the lungs and the intestine, among
other places. In the lungs, this leads to chronic infection, and in the
intestine it can lead to blockage and rupture.

   The gene that allows a cell to manufacture chloride channels was located in
1989. Since then, researchers have shown it can be reinserted into defective
cells growing in culture dishes, which thereafter have normal chloride channels.

   This has led to the idea that CF patients could be treated by having them
inhale a vapor containing viruses that have been "loaded" with the missing gene.
The viruses would infect the cells lining a person's lungs, delivering the gene
and restoring normal function. Having an animal model for CF will now allow
scientists to test this strategy.

   Determining whether gene therapy can alter the course of the disease,
however, may be harder to do. That is because none of the roughly 100 mice born
so far with CF has developed the kind of serious lung problems that CF causes in
humans. Although the average life span for a mouse is about 18 months, most of
the CF-infected mice have died of intestinal rupture in less than one month.

   "We are treating our mice for their intestinal problems to see if they can
live long enough to develop lung problems," said John N. Snouwaert, one of the
researchers at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.

   Mice naturally have fewer mucus-producing cells in their lungs, and the new
CF strain has been kept in a germ-free environment. Both facts could explain why
the disease manifests itself differently in mice than in humans.

   The CF mouse was created using a technique called "genetic knockout," in
which a cell that forms just after fertilization is treated in such a way that a
single, targeted gene is mutated and made nonfunctional. The cell is then
inserted into a growing embryo.

   The resulting mouse has a combination of normal and abnormal versions of the
gene. Through a precise strategy of matings, geneticists can eventually obtain a
strain of animals carrying the "knocked-out" gene in all their cells. The
technique is being used to develop animal models for sickle cell anemia, one
kind of high blood pressure, and a form of hardening of the arteries, among
numerous other diseases.

   There are now about 550 strains of mice with identifiable genetic mutations,
though only about one-fifth of those are close enough to human diseases to
qualify as animal models, said Muriel Davisson, a researcher at the Jackson
Laboratory in Bar Harbor, Maine.

   The world's largest breeder of research mice, the laboratory will take over
breeding the CF mouse on a large scale. The laboratory maintains about 1,700
strains of mice and sells about 2.5 million animals a year. The price ranges
from $ 7 to $ 32, Davisson said, adding that the CF mouse will probably be at
the high end.

   Most genetically defective mice used in research, however, are the products
of chance, not design. The Jackson Laboratory, founded in 1929, has discovered
dozens of them, and has what is known as a "deviant search program," in which
the workers who clean the cages are instructed to remove animals that look or
behave abnormally. Once a week, scientists at the laboratory observe the animals
in a kind of bazaar, taking ones that appear interesting home to their labs for
further study.

   Many mutants, in fact, get their names from their gross appearance. The
cone-head mouse, which has a so-called lysosomal storage disease, is so named
because its head, in the nose-to-neck axis, is shaped like a cone. The
star-gazer mouse has nonconvulsive seizures that stop it in mid-stride, its head
tipped upward. The waltzing mouse has a defect in the middle ear that causes it
to spend much of its time walking in tight circles.


GRAPHIC: PHOTO, MOUSE ON RIGHT HAS CYSTIC FIBROSIS; THE OTHER CARRIES GENE FOR
THE DISEASE. ALTERED STRAIN WAS DEVELOPED TO TEST THERAPIES. AP


                             1398 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1992 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             August 17, 1992 Monday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-2

LENGTH: 458 words

HEADLINE: Scientists ease up in push to test cancer therapy

BYLINE: DAVID GRAHAM, Staff Writer

BODY:

   La Jolla scientists pursuing a gene-therapy treatment for cancer are slowing
their timetable for seeking federal permission to begin the therapy while they
complete lab experiments with the technique. They still hope to start treatment
next year, however, said Ivor Royston, scientific director of the San Diego
Regional Cancer Center, which is developing the gene therapy with scientists
from the UCSD. "We want to start as soon as possible," Royston said. The team
had intended to seek a mandatory federal review next month, but instead will
first publish its findings in a scientific journal, Royston said.

   A patent application has been filed on the technique, he added. The
researchers believe the therapy they are developing could be effective in
fighting melanoma and cancers of the kidney, colon and lymph system by
stimulating a natural immune-system response that sometimes seems to be
insufficient. Gene therapy could become a powerful approach to medicine.

   It uses transplanted genes to produce natural substances that a person lacks
but needs to fight disease.

   Unlike conventional medicines that attack symptoms of disease, the gene
treatments address the underlying cause of disease. Tests examining how the
therapy actually attacks the cancer and tests for any toxic side effects still
are in progress, said Robert E. Sobol, who is connected with the cancer center
and UCSD. The team was turned down in November by a federal review panel, the
Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee of the National Institutes of Health, which
called for more testing.

   The scientists had thought they would reapply at the panel's Sept. 14
meeting. "Without those final pieces of knowledge in place, we thought the RAC
(committee) might take a negative view of the proposal," Sobol said. The
scientists declined to say when they will try again.

   The next review meetings are in December and March. The scientists must also
pass a Federal Drug Administration review before they can test the treatment on
people, and they are preparing for that review, Royston said. Gene therapy is so
new that regulators want to proceed cautiously, and the La Jolla team could
become one of only a handful to get permission to treat people with the
technique. The treatment the San Diego scientists are proposing could be
delivered as an injection of genetically altered cells in an arm or thigh.

   A few million cells, in about the volume of a typical vaccination, would,
like a biological factory, churn out the needed product. The cells would be
altered to contain a gene for interlukin 2, a protein that the scientists
believe is crucial for attracting the immune system's cytotoxic T cells to
destroy tumors. Habib Fakhrai of the San Diego Regional Cancer Center also is on
the team.

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                             1399 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1992 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    August 16, 1992, Sunday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: SPECIAL; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 122 words

HEADLINE: The Reagan-Bush Era;
Reagan - era resumes;
DR.STEVEN ROSENBERG

BYLINE: Staff

BODY:

   Claim to fame:

   As chief of surgery at the National Cancer Institute,
Rosenberg made the dramatic, televised declaration, ""The president
has cancer,'' on July 15, 1985, after tests showed a large tumor
removed from Reagan's large intestine was malignant. Rosenberg was
a member of the surgical team that removed the cancerous growth.  At
a news conference after tests disclosed the malignancy, Dr. Dale W.
Oller first gave a medical description of the growth and then
Rosenberg followed with his declaration of Reagan's condition.

   Life after Reagan:

   Still chief of surgery at the National Cancer Institute,
Rosenberg has been heavily involved in gene therapy for cancer and
has won numerous awards for his work.


GRAPHIC: Mug: Dr. Steven rosenberg (color)

LOAD-DATE: August 18, 1992


                             1400 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1992 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            August 11, 1992 Tuesday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A-2

LENGTH: 664 words

HEADLINE: Combating cancer -- and virulent egos

BYLINE: Neil Morgan

BODY:

   Daniel Gold, a molecular biologist, bought the poster in a shop at the
Smithsonian in Washington.

   WE CAN DO IT, it reads.

   It's a War Production Board poster from World War II, the kind that papered
factory walls.

   A defense worker flexes his arm to display his bulging biceps. All Daniel
Gold did with the poster was to tattoo a double helix on the biceps and stick a
mouse in the clenched fist.

   Now its message adorns a laboratory wall as the rallying cry of the San Diego
Regional Cancer Center, where he and other scientists hope to begin human gene
therapy next year in the fight against cancer. Since cancer research became big
business in San Diego, here and at older centers -- UCSD, Salk Institute,
Scripps Research Institute and La Jolla Cancer Center -- it has begun to display
personality cults.

   San Diego research was prominent this summer as 9,000 men and women convened
here for a world conference of the Society of Clinical Oncology. Robert Sobol of
UCSD and the Regional Cancer Center reported on research at the two institutions
in gene therapy to attack cancers of the kidney, colon and lymph system. The
outspoken director of the Regional Cancer Center is Ivor Royston, 47, an
English-born immunologist known as a tireless researcher and restless
entrepreneur.

   He is one of the more flamboyant members of San Diego's new research
community. He came in 1977 to the faculty of UCSD's School of Medicine.

   He was soon a founder and director of Hybritech, the first big success story
of San Diego's biotech community.

   It was sold in 1986 to Eli Lilly for $480 million.

   About 800 employees shared $80 million of that price. Bristling at
bureaucracy, Royston left UCSD l8 months ago to start his own cancer research
center.

   So far it is an upstairs laboratory on Torrey Pines' Science Park Road. There
is a staff of 32 men and women -- including Daniel Gold -- and a budget of about
$2.6 million. What Royston and his colleagues fear is a shrinkage of grants that
will set back cancer research as real progress is in sight. To offset that,
Royston plans to develop a separate arm of the research center that will
commercialize its inventions and act as agent.

   This arm would, in effect, sell equity to investors, who would share in
profits from research. "When we get funds for the cancer center, it is a
donation," he says.

   "When it comes into corporate development, it is an investment." Royston
views such arrangements as vital to continued funding for research in a world
fraught with deficit. He left UCSD grumbling that universities aren't the proper
setting for such research. "My friends were amazed I lasted as long as I did,"
he says.

   "Life is short, and my idea of what a cancer center should be was not being
accepted.

   The year I left there were six other research areas with higher priority than
cancer.

   I wanted a place where I could decide the priorities." Many argue that there
is duplication of funding and research, and Royston does not disagree. "Scripps
wants to be the center; UCSD wants to be the center," he says. "You could argue
that San Diego doesn't need a lot of cancer centers.

   You could predict that in the future there ought to be a consolidation. "But
the major players are developing their own centers, even their own bone marrow
transplant programs.

   Maybe San Diego needs only one.

   But as long as each center is on a power trip and wants to dominate, they
will battle each other and duplicate services." Rival scientists smile at
Royston's forthrightness, and point out that he has added to such duplication
with his own research center. But Royston, in the persona of entrepreneur,
shrugs off such jibes. "San Diego is simply a great start-up city, one of the
top four or five places in the nation in this kind of research," he says.

   "We will have more major biotech companies emerging here in the next decade
or two." He grinned and waved me into his lab. "You want to see a gene machine?"
he asked.

   "Here's a little gem that will make authentic DNA for you."

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007
